# Chapter 1

# Introduction

## How can we send money to a friend?

Meet Maria and her best friend George, who decide to meet up for a vacation. George’s budget is tight, so Maria offers to send some money to help pay for the flight, hotel room, and food.

If Maria sends the money to George through the traditional banking system, they trust two intermediate parties (their respective banks) to symbolically move the funds for them. 

There is no actual movement of physical bills or assets, both banks simply edit their respective database to show that the funds have been moved. When Maria submits the transaction to her bank (whether that's online, on her bank app, or a check), her bank subtracts $2,500 from her account balance on their ledger, then contacts George’s bank and requests that they add $2,500 to George’s balance, so that he can withdraw the funds to pay for travel expenses. 

This process is shown in Figure X.1:

[Figure X.1](soon)

There are a few drawbacks and risks to this system, and it requires total trust of banks. Maria, George, and the banks must act on faith that transactions are legitimate and that the ledgers are kept honest. This trust in the intermediate third parties poses a risk, since the banks or a nefarious actor may create unlimited money by fraudulently editing the ledger balances or transaction database.

Furthermore, Maria does not actually have possession of $977241, only an IOU from her bank that she must trust is redeemable. She has no way to audit her bank to verify whether they actually have $977241. 

In fact, they may not hold that much, since most banks legally operate on “fractional reserve” - meaning that their actual assets are allowed to be significantly less than the total balance promised to account owners.

Depending on how the funds were sent, it could take anywhere from minutes to days before the $2,500 shows up in George’s bank account. Since George is not privy to the banks’ ledgers or communications, the entire process is opaque and cannot be monitored.

Many people that have not personally experienced economic disruption take functioning banks and the validity of their IOUs for granted. Few individuals consider the unsettling ramifications of handing their lifelong savings to opaque corporations, often putting all their eggs in a single institutional basket. Losses can occur due to:

* negligence (the bank makes a mistake),
* financial issues (the bank overextends their assets or goes out of business),
* malice and corruption (the bank or a rogue employee steals your money)
* hostile third parties (the bank is robbed or a hacker thieves electronic funds)

Thankfully, an emerging new technology called blockchain is capable of mitigating all of the above risks by creating a decentralized database that all parties can equally use, view, and verify.

## Introduction to blockchains

Anybody can learn all about Monero and how the blockchain works without having to understand the underlying mathematics and cryptography (similar to how anybody can become internet-savvy without first studying DNS servers and the IPv6 protocol). This chapter focuses on the key concepts and vocabulary without digging into all of the technical details - you can jump ahead to chapter 6  [crosslink to the 6th chapter] if you want to dive into the cryptographic framework.

The term “blockchain” refers to a new method for securing records in a database that all network users share. It is groundbreaking for being a “trustless” system, where individuals retain full autonomy over their funds. There is no central authority, and each participant can easily verify and audit the system.

Anyone in the world is welcome to act as a network maintainer, and each participant keeps the others honest by verifying the blockchain. When users broadcast information to be placed on the blockchain, network maintainers group these transmissions into “blocks” and use cryptographic tools to finalize the records and permanently link them onto the blockchain.

Once data is sealed onto the blockchain, it cannot be deleted, moved, or altered in any way. ​The records are immutable and each participant on the network has a matching copy of the blockchain for their own verification. The blockchain uses a clever “mining” model that encourages network participation and keeps all of the records honest and synchronized. These types of “decentralized” systems are incredibly robust since there is no single server or central points of failure that can be maliciously attacked or manipulated.

These decentralized systems are also “trustless” since each participant in the network maintains and
verifies their own copy of the records instead of relying on any third party. Given that blockchains provide a system for global tamperproof recordkeeping, they are extremely well-suited for storing financial data. In fact, the very first distributed blockchain was conceptualized and launched for the Bitcoin cryptocurrency!

In 2008, an anonymous individual or group known as Satoshi Nakamoto published a whitepaper describing “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System.” This world-changing document laid out the framework for open-source decentralized cryptocurrencies and the revolutionary blockchain technology that makes them possible.

Figure X.1 in the first section highlighted that sending money through the traditional banking system requires multiple, transactions, ledgers, and trust in multiple banks. Figure X.2 (below) shows how Maria could send money to George using an imaginary cryptocurrency (XYZ) that uses a typical transparent open ledger. Maria will to 10.5 XYZ from her account (1BuUygisXY) to an address controlled by George (PeK5FSykwp).

A few of the blockchain benefits are immediately apparent:

* **Simplicity (& speed)**: Maria’s money is sent to George in a single step to update a single ledger. Whereas bank and wire transfers can take days or weeks, cryptocurrency ledgers typically update in seconds or minutes (the transaction time varies for different cryptocurrencies).

* **No third-party risks**: Maria and George rely on their own cryptographically-secured and self-maintained system instead of placing their money and trust in the hands of third parties.

* **Pseudo-anonymity**: Unlike the banks, cryptocurrency ledgers never learn names like “Maria” and “George” with the accounts. In fact, personal information is never necessary for generating a cryptocurrency address. George will access the funds pseudonymously, using his key for the “PeK5FSykwp” address to which Maria broadcasted the money (from her account, “1BuUygisXY”).

Bitcoin and the other cryptocurrencies that followed have launched a financial revolution that is still unfolding. With these new decentralized networks, anybody can personally store and globally transfer funds at their own discretion. Prior to cryptocurrencies, it was difficult to store large amounts of wealth securely without trusting your savings to banks or credit unions. Likewise, transferring money to another individual or business required reliance on third-party payment processors for checks, wire transfers, or credit/debit cards.

Thanks to cryptocurrencies, for the first time, anybody can exercise their basic financial rights without requiring access to a bank and approval from external institutions! In mere moments, any device (computer, phone, tablet) can be used to initialize a new cryptocurrency wallet that is fully functional for sending, storing, and receiving funds. Setting up a wallet does not require any kind of identification, fees, or authorization, and the system identifies users by addresses that look like random strings of numbers and letters instead of personally identifiable details such as street address or city.

## Blockchain Drawbacks

Most cryptocurrencies are “pseudo-anonymous”, since their users are identified by unintelligible strings rather than personal identifiers. When you receive a cryptocurrency payment, you do not learn the sender’s name, instead you receive the funds from an address such as: 1A1zP1eP5QGefi2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa

While this preserves privacy in some ways, it exposes other sensitive information. Recall, every participant in a decentralized blockchain possesses a complete copy of the entire record. In the context of cryptocurrencies, this ledger is used to ascertain the account balance for any (e.g. Bitcoin) address.

This transparent ledger means that every account balance is public! In fact, several helpful websites allow you to easily search the blockchain for any address or transaction. Suppose you run a shop, and one of your customers pays for a loaf of bread from the Bitcoin address 3P3QsMVK89JBNqZQv5zMAKG8FK3kJM4rjt. You can instantly check the blockchain and see that this account has received more than 5,000 Bitcoins! Knowing that your customer handled $50,000,000 recently, you might be inclined to charge more in the future, or (if you're feeling desparate) simply rob them now. This privacy issue presents a personal security risk.

In addition to knowing your customer’s balance, you can also see every transaction that they have received or sent: the amount, the timestamp, and both participants’ addresses. Analysis of transaction histories and patterns can be used to profile your spending patterns, wealth, income, and with whom you interact. A great amount of your personal information is exposed if your blockchain history is linked to your identity (for example, during an online purchase or while registering for a cryptocurrency exchange). Often the owner of an account can be revealed with a little bit of research; for instance, you might have already searched for the two Bitcoin addresses listed above to learn that they belong to Satoshi Nakomoto and the Pineapple Fund charity, respectively.

Several companies exist solely to track and deanonymize transparent blockchains. For example, Elliptic offers an interactive explorer that shows the flow of funds between Satoshi, payment processors and exchanges, forums, marketplaces, gambling services, charities, known individuals, and other services. Figure Y shows a screenshot detailing significant Bitcoin transactions in the early 2010s, including connections between mining pools, Mt. Gox, and the Silk Road marketplace.

Figure X: Elliptic’s blockchain analysis of Bitcoin flow in the early 2010’s, from the interactive Bitcoin Big Bang explorer [link: https://www.elliptic.co/bigbang-v1.html]

Take a moment to consider the valuable sensitive information that you generate each day: credit card transactions, search phrases, products you view or purchase, social media sites that you interact with, etc… Almost all of it is recorded, profiled, and monetized by your banks, payment processors, giant tech/data industries, and governments.

This mass collection of your data results in centralization of your personal and private information in vast troves of sensitive material that are juicy targets for hackers and blackmarket resale. It is quite probable that your personal details (such as name, address, email, phone number, etc) are already in the public domain without your knowledge, perhaps connected with your demographic and/or marketing dossier.

Consider the recent Equifax, Target, Home Depot , Uber, and Panera  data breaches. In many cases, both personal and financial information were compromised, putting individuals and their cards at risk.

Accidental data breaches are not the only concern. Big data and tech companies carefully record your activities online to provide better services. Often, this refers to targeted marketing and ads; however, this data can also be leveraged for more questionable uses such as manipulating your feelings or your voting behavior.

Anything that companies track about you may be used maliciously or stolen/resold. You should exercise great caution regarding your digital footprint, since information cannot be “unleaked” after your personal details are exposed.

Right now, privacy is conspicuously absent from mainstream economic and commercial systems. Traditional payment processors, banks, and cryptocurrencies make it easy to collect and sell your data. Once collected, you often have no way to control or track the proliferation of your data, or the privacy and personal security risks that arise from its sale to unknown parties. Even with substantial pro-privacy legislation, it can be difficult or impossible to make information about you disappear.

The only guaranteed way to exercise your right to financial privacy is to avoid revealing personal information in the first place! To stay safe, we need a way to interact securely - where transactions cannot be linked to your identity, your wealth, or other transactions. The Monero cryptocurrency is your best tool for taking all of these matters into your own hands!

## Introducing Monero

[infographic]

Monero (pronounced /mōnĕrō/, plural “Moneroj” or "Monero") is a leading cryptocurrency with a focus on private and censorship-resistant transactions. The transparent nature of most cryptocurrencies (such as Bitcoin and Ethereum) allows anybody in the world to track your money. Furthermore, links between your financial records and personal identity may jeopardize your safety.

To avoid these dangers, Monero uses powerful cryptographic techniques to create a network that allows parties to interact without revealing the sender, recipient, or transaction amounts. Like other cryptocurrecies, Monero has a decentralized ledger that all participants can download and verify for themselves.

However, a series of mathematical tricks are used to conceal all of the sensitive details and styme any blockchain tracking. Monero users reap all the benefits of a decentralized trustless financial system, without risking the security and privacy downsides of a transparent blockchain.

One of Monero’s crucial defining features is enforced privacy by default​. Users are specifically prevented from initializing transactions that are accidentally or intentionally insecure. This provides Monero users with peace of mind since the network will not accept a revealing transaction! If a user prioritizes transparency, they can selectively reveal information off-chain, rather than committing to a completely public record.

Figure X.3 (below) shows how Maria sends George funds for booking flights using Monero. The process is functionally the same as the cryptocurrency transaction shown in Figure X.2, however the sensitive information is cryptographically obscured. Information like account balances and transaction amounts are secretly encrypted, in contrast to the transparent public record that most cryptocurrencies are built on. 

Monero’s privacy features allow the network to assess the validity of a transaction and determine whether or not the sender has a sufficient account balance, without actually knowing the transaction amount or account balances! Nobody can view others’ account balances, and transactions don’t reveal the source of the funds being transferred. 

These are marked with “???” in the diagram, since an no outside observer can ascertain the values. The mechanics behind these unique privacy features are discussed in chapter X.

[Figure X.3]
## Principles of Monero

Monero is designed with the following principles in mind:

* **Network Decentralization**: The Monero network and ledger are globally distributed. This means that there is no single server or database that can be maliciously controlled or censored. If one government were to shut down Monero nodes in their country, or attempt to limit who can send/receive Monero, the effort would be in vain! The rest of the world will carry on the network and process any valid transactions. Anonymizing routers hide Monero use if needed in extreme circumstances.

* **Financial Security**: The globally-distributed Monero has no central weak point that can be hacked to steal your funds. Your Moneroj are secured by immutable cryptographic techniques, so there is no need to trust a third party with responsibility over your funds. Every single Monero participant can verify the validity of the ledger themselves, so you do not even have to trust the node operators! (You can learn more about the cryptographic techniques that secure Monero in chapter X)

* **Financial Privacy**: Most blockchain projects increase security at the expense of privacy; however, Monero maintains security without sacrificing privacy. Transaction amounts, sender identity, and recipient identity are all obfuscated on the blockchain, so your Moneroj storage and spending activities are not trackable.

* **Fungibility**: The term “fungibility” means that some type of asset is considered interchangeable. For example, imagine that you let your neighbor borrow 1 kilogram of flour for a cake. When they return flour the next week, of course it will be 1 kilogram of flour from a different source (since they used your original flour for baking). This is not a problem, since flour is fungible. However, vehicles are not fungible; if you let your neighbor borrow your car, you probably want the same one back!

In the case of Monero, its fungibility is a feature of its sophisticated privacy practices, and refers to how the obfuscated transaction record means that it is impossible to ascertain the history of any particular Moneroj. If you let your friend borrow 1 Monero, they can return any 1 Monero, since they’re indistinguishable. This particular quality may seem like a minor nuance, but fungibility is crucially necessary for something to be practically used as a currency (see examples below). This characteristic is absent from most cryptocurrencies, with transparent ledgers and trackable histories.

## Real-life "use-case" for Monero

This section talks about some of the difficulties and risks that arise from using insecure cryptocurrencies. For simplicity, the examples refer to “Bitcoin” as the prototypical transparent-blockchain currency. However, these drawbacks are not exclusive to Bitcoin.

* **Price manipulation**: Sofia is the only mechanic in a small town. One of her customers paid for an oil change with Bitcoin. Sofia later looked up his address on the ledger and saw that the customer’s wallet contained enough Bitcoin for a new Lamborghini. Next time he needed a repair, she doubled her prices. If the customer had used Monero, Sofia would have been unable view his balance or use such information to manipulate prices.

* **Financial surveillance**: Oleg’s parents send him some Bitcoin to pay for textbooks, and then continue to snoop on his Bitcoin address and activity. A few months later, Oleg sends some leftover Bitcoin to the public donation address for an organization that does not align with his parents’ political views. He does not realize that they are still monitoring his Bitcoin activity until he receives a furious email from his parents, berating him. If Oleg had used Monero, his family would not have been upset from prying into his transaction activity.

* **Supply chain privacy**: Kyung-seok owns a small business providing family catering services for local events. A large food company uses blockchain tracing to identify most of his regular clients. The corporation uses this list to contact Kyung-seok’s customers, offering similar deals for 5% less. If Kyung-seok’s business used Monero instead, its transaction history could not have been exploited by rival businesses seeking to steal his customers.

* **Discrimination**: Ramona finds her dream apartment, conveniently close to her new job in a great neighborhood. She pays her rent on time every month, but the landlord notices that she often receives Bitcoin from a legal online casino. The landlord personally despises gambling, and unexpectedly chooses to not renew Ramona’s lease. If rent was paid in Monero, the landlord would not be able to review and discriminate based on Ramona’s sources of income.

* Transaction security/privacy: Sven sells a guitar to a stranger, and gives the buyer a Bitcoin address from his long-term savings wallet. The buyer checks the blockchain, sees the large sum of money that Sven has saved up, and consequently robs him at gunpoint. If Sven had instead given a Monero address for payment, the buyer would not have been able to view Sven’s wealth.

* Censorship: ​Makalah purchases some Bitcoin from an online exchange that verified her identity, then transfers a portion to a charity supporting human rights in her country. Two years later, her government analyzes the blockchain and notes the transaction from a known exchange to a blacklisted activist group. The government subpoena the exchange for Makalah’s identity and arrests her the next day. If Makalah used Monero for the donation, her government would never have known the source or destination of that contribution.

* Tainted coins: Loki sells some of his artwork online to save up for college. When he pays tuition, he is shocked to receive a “payment INVALID” email from the school. Unbeknownst to Loki, one of his paintings was purchased using some Bitcoin that were stolen during an exchange hack the previous year. Since the school rejects any payment from a blacklist of “tainted” Bitcoins, they refuse to mark the bill “paid.” Loki is in an extremely difficult position: the Bitcoin that he saved has already been spent from his account, yet the tuition bill is still unpaid. This entire situation would have been avoided if Loki sold his paintings for Monero instead, since its fungibility precludes tracking or blacklists.

## Monero: open-source decentralized community and software

Monero is an open-source project actively developed by cryptography and distributed systems experts from all over the world. Many of these developers freely donate their time to the Monero Project, while others are funded by the Monero community so they can focus entirely on the project.

The decentralized nature of Monero’s development team brings several benefits over a consolidated corporation or organization. The Monero Project is a living entity, greater than any individual or group. Since both the network and development team are spread across the globe, it cannot be shut down by any single country, or controlled within any particular legal jurisdiction.

The term “open-source” means that the source code (software blueprints) are made publicly available for anybody to inspect. The alternative is “closed-source” software, where developers only deliver the final compiled product (“binaries” like .exe files) that cannot be opened and studied. If you use closed-source software, you are trusting the developer and distributor. The problem is that even a developer with the best intentions may make a mistake that hackers later discover and exploit. Only use open-source cryptocurrency software that has been audited by independent parties to verify the absence of that malicious code, accidental mistakes, and implementation weaknesses.

The cryptocurrency community has embraced open-source software from the very start: Bitcoin was released as a public white paper and open-source community-built code, which stood in stark contrast to the opaque and proprietary decision structure endemic to fiat (government-backed) currencies. Of course, the open-source philosophy has been around much longer than cryptocurrencies! Over 25 years, more than 5,000 coders have contributed to the open-source Linux kernel, which is widely considered to be one of the most secure operating systems.

The trust and security benefits of open-source software are of key importance for any cryptocurrency, so The Monero Project is entirely open-source. The developers uses Git [link: https://github.com/monero-project/monero] for version control, which allows anybody to easily review every single line of code proposed to be added, removed, or modified. Over 500 developers have contributed to, reviewed, and tested the Monero code, which drastically lowers the likelihood that any errors have been overlooked. Developers can find more information about interacting with Monero’s codebase in chapter X.

Development team transparency is very important for community trust, especially in the context of cryptocurrencies. In addition to posting code for public scrutiny, The Monero Project also conducts all development team meetings on open IRC channels, [link: https://getmonero.org/community/hangouts/] and the logs are archived on the public Monero website. [link: https://getmonero.org/blog/tags/dev%20diaries.html]

## History of Monero

In 2013, Nicolas van Saberhagen published the “CryptoNote” protocol, which became the foundation for many coins, starting with Bytecoin. Like the unknown Satoshi Nakamoto, the creator of Bytecoin remained anonymous and promoted their coin through a Bitcointalk thread.

Some aspects of Bytecoin appeared dubious under close scrutiny. Bitcointalk member “thankful_for_today” investigated the emissions curve and noted that approximately 82% of the coins had already been emitted, so the circulating coin supply was potentially dangerously centralized.

Ultimately, this greedy premine undermined Bytecoin’s credibility and practicality. Thankfully, thankful_for_today recognized the value in CryptoNote’s features, and incorporated them into a new project centered around a strong, community-driven development team. The Monero cryptocurrency, spearheaded by thankful_for_today, launched in April 2014. The coin was originally named “BitMonero,” however the community quickly elected to shorten it to “Monero.”

The events that unfoleded were quite peculiar. The largest source of controvery occured when thankful_for_today recommended merge mining with ByteCoin, a ecommendation that was strongly opposed by most community members. Ultimately, these and other disagreements led to the Monero Core Team forking the project from thankful_for_today. Thankful_for_today updated their chain for a short time before abandoning the project.

Monero needed to create resources to support the CryptoNote protocol. Services like mining pools, GUI wallets, and other important tools for adoption needed to be developed from scratch. Interested academics founded the Monero Research Lab and wrote initial papers explaining more simply how the protocol worked and how it could be improved. These recommendations would outline several years of work.

## Ethical Discussion

Monero was carefully engineered to provide characteristics like fungibility and transaction privacy that are necessary for any currency (crypto- or otherwise) to be feasible for general use. As discussed in the section on use cases [internal link], there are significant practical issues that arise with financial systems that do not protect users’ privacy.

The very features necessary to keep Monero safe for day-to-day users and businesses are unfortunately also appealing to those wishing to conceal illicit activity. Because of Monero’s privacy features and ease of mining, it has been utilized by criminals, ransomware, and covert mining (employing “botnets” of many victims’ hijacked devices).

Monero is not intended to facilitate illegal activity, which has plagued every currency since the idea of money was conceived thousands of years ago. The scale of illegal transactions conducted using cryptocurrencies is dwarfed by the staggeringly-vast amount of criminal activity that occurs every day denominated in fiat currencies like Euros, Rupees, Yen, or Dollars.

The creators of “Mastering Monero” and the entire Monero Community do not condone illegal activities, and we do not wish to assist criminals. If you wish to use Monero for exploitation or dark purposes, please close this book now, and do not use our project for harmful ends.
