# Chapter 2

# Getting started: receiving, storing and sending Monero
The last chapter focused on WHY to use Monero; in this chapter you will learn HOW to use Monero. You can master using Monero without needing to learn any of the complex cryptographic or network technical details, so that extra information is saved for later in the book. Chapter 2 will cover all the practical skills you’ll need to get started receiving, storing, and spending your Moneroj.

The first part of this chapter covers key concepts and terminology for Monero use, as general information that will apply to any wallet or software. Toward the end of the chapter, you’ll find handy guides for carrying out these steps using the free official open-source Monero command line interface (CLI) or graphical user interface (GUI) software.

## What is a Wallet?

Before you obtain some Moneroj, you must plan ahead for where you will receive and store your funds. You will need a “wallet” to help you store and spend your Moneroj. Just like physical wallets for your bills, there are lots of different types of Monero wallets, and you can always move some of your money from an old wallet to a new one.

Wallets take care of the complicated cryptographic processes for you, so you don’t need to know any fancy mathematics to use Monero. You will only need to manage a seed and your address(es). Other details like “public keys” and “private keys” are managed behind-the-scenes by your wallet, so they are not discussed until chapter VI.

Your Monero seed is a secret string that your wallet uses to locate and spend your Moneroj, though it is converted into a series of 12-25+ words for convenience. This secret is like a treasure map to your money on the blockchain, and anybody who learns your seed can use their wallet to access and spend your Moneroj. For this reason, you must be extremely careful when you generate and store your seed. Do not set up a wallet in a coffee shop, where other patrons or cameras may see your secret. It is dangerous to store your seed electronically (e.g. in a text file or email) since malicious software or services may run off with your Moneroj.

Your seed is used to generate your address(es), which you can share with others. Most wallets will show your address in two different formats - a written string of numbers/letters, and a visual QR code. These are redundant, and you can safely share either form.

If your wallet is physically damaged, you can simply import your seed into a new wallet, and pick up right where you left off! As long as you have a copy of your seed, you can always access your funds. However, if you lose your seed, there is no way to ever recover access to your Moneroj. You may be familiar with passwords, which can usually be reset by contacting an administrator. Seeds are not like passwords - nobody else knows your secret, and the network is unable to shift your Moneroj to a new account if you lose your seed.

Most software will prompt you to write down the seed when you initialize a new wallet, however some apps do this in the background, and you must take the initiative to backup your wallet. Be sure to do this immediately, or else a damaged device will cause you to permanently lose your funds.

## 2.2 Selecting the best wallets for your needs

There are various storage solutions, and they vary in terms of convenience, privacy, and security. Your individual needs will determine which type(s) of wallets are best for you. Many people use multiple storage solutions: often a convenient “hot wallet” that holds small amounts for day-to-day use, complemented by a more secure “cold wallet” for long-term savings or large amounts. The wallet types described below differ primarily in where the secrets are stored.

### 2.2.1 Software and Mobile Wallets

Software wallets (on a desktop PC or mobile device) are convenient for storing and using Monero. Many Monero users have a handy “hot wallet” on their phones, to pay for small purchases. A good rule of thumb is to only walk around carrying as much cryptocurrency as you would feel comfortable holding in regular cash. The secret seed is stored on your device, so your Moneroj could be stolen if you catch a virus.

### 2.2.2 Hardware Wallets
Hardware wallets are physical devices that can carry out sensitive wallet functions, completely isolated from the connected phone or computer. Hardware wallets have their own built-in screens, to show you the seed and transaction details without ever sending them to an external device! 

While hardware wallets are less convenient than software wallets, they are extremely secure! Because of how they store and protect your seed, you can safely use a hardware wallet to send transactions from a device that you suspect or know is compromised with malicious software. The Monero community is currently developing “Kastelo” - [the first-ever open-source cryptocurrency hardware wallet](https://kastelo.org).

### 2.2.3 Paper Wallets

Paper wallets provide an inexpensive way to stash Moneroj that you do not plan to move frequently; you simply print out a physical copy of your public and secret information for safe storage. Since the secrets from your Monero seed are saved only on paper - not digitally - you do not have to worry about viruses or data leaks. However, paper wallets are not convenient for frequent use, since you must transfer the secrets to a digital device every time you wish to send Moneroj.

### 2.2.4 Web Wallets

Web wallets are Monero accounts that you access through a website hosted by some third party. These online wallets are extremely convenient, however this comes at the expense of your security and privacy. There are essentially two types of web wallets - the crucial difference is whether or not you know the seed.

The riskier type of web wallet stores the money in their own accounts and gives you a username and password to log in (this includes your wallets on exchanges). Since you do not have the seed yourself, you do not personally control your funds; you must trust the service to hold your money for you. You should be extremely wary of storing Moneroj in these types of web wallets, which are essentially providing banking services. They might lose your funds at any time, whether through accident or theft. If the website is shut down, your username and password are useless - since you don’t have the seed yourself, your funds are gone.

Well-designed web wallets, such as MyMonero, are developed so that the third-party server never learns your secret. You must enter your seed every time you log in, because it is not known to the provider or stored on your device between uses. This type of wallet is relatively safer since the third party is not holding your funds, only providing a software interface for your browser. If the website for this type of wallet becomes inaccessible, you can enter your seed into a different wallet and fully recover your funds.

While web wallets are convenient, neither type is recommended for long-term storage or large amounts. Both types have security downsides (trusting your funds to a third party, or frequently typing your seed into a web browser) and you lose many of the privacy benefits of Monero.

### 2.2.5 Cold Wallets

Cold wallets refer to any device that is generally kept offline and used only for storing your secrets. They could use any operating system, and you must be very deliberate with strong security (including a firewall, antivirus, and extreme caution regarding accessing only trusted websites/software). The seed is still on the computer, but you keep the device sequestered from the rest of the world as much as possible.


### 2.2.6 Monero Wallet Links

Regardless of which type(s) of wallet you choose, be careful to only download vetted software from through proper channels. Phishing schemes and scam wallets are numerous, so be sure to double-check that you are installing legitimate software! If you enter your seed into a malicious wallet, your Moneroj will be gone before realize your mistake.

This section contains links to several open-source wallets that are developed and trusted by the Monero community.

* Mac/Windows/Linux: An official Monero wallet is available with command line interface (CLI) and graphical user interface (GUI) versions. 
https://getmonero.org/downloads
* Android: Monerujo
* iOS : CakeWallet and XWallet
* Web Wallet : Mymonero.com (safer type of web wallet, secrets stay on your device)

### 2.2.7 Connecting to a remote node (optional)

You can reduce sync time and disk usage by connecting to a “remote node” instead of storing the entire blockchain on your device. Most mobile wallets are automatically configured to connect to a remote node. If you need to manually direct your software to a remote node, you can use the community resources at node.moneroworld.com port 18089.

Nodes are computers that have downloaded the entire blockchain, and assist other users by syncing their wallets and relaying their transactions. Running your own (local) node is best for privacy, and you can choose to share your node publically if you wish to help secure the network. Remote nodes are convenient, and allow a user to quickly begin using Monero without downloading the entire blockchain.

Running a node is not the same as “mining” Monero. Mining is a different resource-intensive process, not discussed until Chapter IV. Once the blockchain is synced, running a local node is not heavy on CPU or network resources.

## 2.3 Using Monero

This section explains what you need to know for sending and receiving Monero. All of the examples in this book use the following seed:

` MASTERING MONERO DEMO SEED: lamb hexagon aces acquire twang bluntly argue when unafraid awning academy nail threaten sailor palace selfish cadets click sickness juggled border thumbs remedy ridges border `

You can import this seed in yourself to practice generating addresses, checking transaction history, and verifying payments. You can use this seed to follow along with examples in the book, but do not send your Monero to it! Anybody else reading Mastering Monero will be able to spend it!

### 2.3.1 Receiving Monero

To receive Monero, all you have to do is find your address through your wallet and share it with the person sending you Moneroj. Most wallets will show your address in two formats: an alphanumeric string that is easy to copy+paste, and a QR code that is handy for scanning with a camera. Here are examples of both formats, from the DEMO seed above:

<RECEIVING FIGURE DRAFT TO ADDRESS “4BKj...feW5”>

This address that you share is not stored on the blockchain (thanks to a Monero feature known as “stealth addresses” that are discussed in Chapter III and Chapter VI). Monero also allows you to generate multiple “subaddresses” from your single secret seed, so you can share many different addresses that all deposit to the same wallet.

Wallets may wait 10 - 20 minutes for “confirmation” before marking funds as received and safe to spend (you can learn why in Chapter IV). This is a common security practice, and wallets usually show the “unconfirmed” transaction during the waiting period. If your wallet is waiting for a 0.06 XMR payment to confirm, you may see something like this:

`
Balance: 0.075 XMR
Available balance: 0.015 XMR
`

There is no need for concern when this occurs! Within less than a half hour, the funds will confirm and transfer to your available balance.

### 2.3.2 Sending Monero

To send Monero, you only need to input the recipient’s address and the amount that you wish to transfer. If you are sending Moneroj to a business, they may also ask you to include a “payment ID” to connect your payment to your order. If you are sending Moneroj to yourself or a friend, you can leave the payment ID field blank.

Your wallet will add small network fees to pay for sending your transaction. The fee associated with a given transaction varies depending on current network load and the location of your funds. Wallets will usually suggest an appropriate fee to send your transaction in a reasonable time.

### 2.3.3 Proof of Payment

Given Monero’s anonymity, you might wonder how somebody can prove that a payment was sent. Besides optional payment IDs, Monero has a second feature to selectively reveal proof that you sent funds. A legitimate “transaction key” can only be generated by the true sender.

*Example*

Suppose your friends Khan and Maria each owe you 0.06552376 XMR for a meal that you split. You only receive 1 payment, with the information below:

* **Amount**: 0.06552376 XMR
* **Transaction ID**: 4b540773ddf9e819f0df47708f3d3c9f7f62933150b90edc89103d36d42ca4b7
* **Received to (your) sub-address**: 899Ao1NQtu4ezACgw1QKXK4QBf5s8a3WHHtAjFfPm3Nf71mAkREEgAuKzASXHt8E7vVJFKsQJuvApBfu21WY9WN97Put8M5

This is a real transaction received by the DEMO wallet on 20-Apr 2018. You can see *some* information through a [blockchain explorer](https://monerohash.com/explorer/search?value=4b540773ddf9e819f0df47708f3d3c9f7f62933150b90edc89103d36d42ca4b7), however the Monero sender is always unknown. Both Khan and Maria claim that they sent the payment, so you ask each to provide the transaction key.

Khan: `OutProofV1N4Y5pUJEnRACJyB5C3zK1zTqAihdnN8MfVZhEWfD13Z2N7Npt1uxa1EY7N7jnvuJF76tXUwKrakvZSxTj4Zux5SpavFb4X1jRcLAJ2b5hqviQPiS58j2qH53QL44CJEgHtY5`

Maria: `OutProofV1To53Qu2gegZbUevosKCTwrEdqiECgFyUygutXMEdhrHg1EtXMrFNaszWYFjdU4aXFZ2iPF8G8jzoDJzCoW5dsWvb4mVN65abAya3U47cGXs7WABrTzG5aPfV4YBANhwPgwD2`

When you check both of their transaction keys, Maria’s confirms payment to your address and Khan’s key returns “bad signature.” You can practice this yourself using the above address and transaction keys!

## 2.4 Operational Security

Monero allows you to “be your own bank”, since nobody can control your funds besides you! This grassroots financial empowerment is one of the greatest benefits of cryptocurrencies. However, with great power comes great responsibility! Keeping operational security (“OpSec”) in mind is important for keeping yourself and your funds safe.

### 2.4.1 Never say how much Monero you own

Sayings like “loose lips sink ships” exist for a reason. When you publicly disclose about how much Monero you have, you may inadvertently make yourself a target for scams or theft. This is especially true in cases of online forums and social media. Attackers prowl the internet looking for people to reveal information about themselves that they might be able to take advantage of.

Most individuals know better than to post about the balance of their bank account or retirement portfolio on social media. It is a security risk, rude, and can make interpersonal relationships awkward when wealth imbalances are involved. However, lots of people naively declare how much Bitcoin or Monero they have bought.

Remember that cryptocurrency prices are volatile, and are known to increase dramatically. A post stating “I just spent $50 on Bitcoin in case it lasts” from 2012 may have seemed modest at the time, however that $50 (~10 BTC in 2012) was worth nearly a million dollars by the end of 2017, less than 5 years later! Messages on the internet can be hard to erase, so the best way to avoid this situation is never posting in the first place.

Given the general interest in cryptocurrency investing, there is lots of conversation about holdings and portfolio composition. You should always talk in percentages rather than absolute amounts. Instead of saying “20 Moneroj and 0.2 Bitcoin” simply explain that your portfolio is comprised of “60% Monero and 40% Bitcoin”.

Advocating for Monero and teaching new users about it is one thing; boasting about how much XMR you own is another. Outreach is valuable, and the former is helpful for everybody; however, you should avoid the latter at all costs.

### 2.4.2 Keeping your seed safe

Your funds are only as safe as your seed, and there are two types of concerns: loss due to accident, and loss due to theft.

To avoid the loss due to accident, always make sure your seed is backed up somewhere secure. Always ask yourself: “If my phone dies or this website breaks, do I have a way to access my funds?”. You should consider keeping a second written copy of the seed in a second safe location. You don’t want to lose both your device and your backup seed if your house floods or burns.

To avoid loss due to theft, never share your seed or keys with anybody else. Anyone with access to your seed can steal 100% of your funds, and Monero’s privacy features will make it impossible for you to determine where they went.


