# Chapter 3

# How Monero works

## General presentation of Monero Technologies
## Blockchain
A blockchain, originally block chain, is a continuously growing list of
records, called blocks, which are linked and secured using
cryptography.

Each block typically contains a hash pointer as a link to a previous
block, a timestamp and transaction data. By design, blockchains are
inherently resistant to modification of the data.

It is "an open, distributed ledger that can record transactions
between two parties efficiently and in a verifiable and permanent
way". For use as a distributed ledger, a blockchain is typically
managed by a peer-to-peer network collectively adhering to a
protocol for validating new blocks. Once recorded, the data in any
given block cannot be altered retroactively without the alteration of
all subsequent blocks, which requires collusion of the network
majority.

## Transaction
Each transaction within the Monero network has a set of inputs and
outputs, where inputs consume Monero from the sender and
outputs transfer them to the recipient.

From there, the transaction is digitally signed by the sender, who
authorizes the transfer of Monero. The transaction is then
broadcasted to the network and grouped with several other
transactions in the form of a block, which the network’s miners
solve/validate. You'll have to pay a fee for each input, in this way you
could incentivate the mining as known as validiting transaction.
Once the block is accepted, the transactions get recorded on the
blockchain (which, as you may recall, is a public ledger) in
chronological order. Whenever this process is successfully completed,
the network distributes new Monero to miners for each block that
has been solved/validated. This is referred to as a block reward as
knows as Mining.

## How does Monero work
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, Monero is based on the Cryptonote
protocol and utilizes the most powerful cryptographic techniques in
an effort to protect the privacy of the sender, recipient, and obfuscate
the amount transacted.

[[ Monero Scheme ]]

Below, you will be provided more detail on the underlying
cryptographic techniques that Monero utilizes to ensure the privacy
of every Monero user during the transaction process.

## How Monero protect your privacy

## Stealth address
What we have learnt is that Monero uses a distributed peer-to-peer
consensus network to record transaction outputs on a blockchain.
If Leo owns Monero, it means that he has exclusive control over some
of these outputs. When Leo sends Monero to George, Leo is
announcing to the network that he wishes to transfer the value of
some of his outputs to a new output for George, which only he can
control. In other words, a transaction is the transformation of old
outputs belonging to one wallet into new outputs belonging to
another. Let’s take this a step further, to see how stealth addresses
enhance a user’s privacy.

In every transaction, a stealth address, also known as a one-time
public key, is automatically generated and recorded as part of the
transaction to indicate who can spend an output in a later
transaction. An outside observer cannot tell if funds are moving from
Leo to George nor link wallet addresses together by just looking at
the blockchain. Therefore, when Leo sends Monero to George, the
output George receives will not be publicly associated with George’s
wallet address. However, if Leo ever needs to prove that he in fact
sent Monero to George, his wallet has the ability to verify that
payment was sent. George can rest assured that no one else can see
when or if any Monero was sent to him.

If George were a merchant,
this feature would be a great benefit, because no one can tell how
many different customers he has, whether any of them are repeat
customers, or if he has any customers at all.

A Monero wallet address is a 95-character string, which consists of a
public view key and a public spend key. When Leo sends Monero to
George, Leo’s wallet will use George’s public view key and public
spend key as well as some random data to generate a unique onetime
public key for George’s new output.

Everyone can see the one-time public key on the blockchain, but only
Leo and George know that Leo sent Monero to George. The output is
created in such a way that George is able to locate the output
destined for him by scanning the blockchain with his wallet’s private
view key. Once the output is detected and retrieved by George’s
wallet, he would be able to calculate a one-time private key that
corresponds with the one-time public key and spend the relevant
output with his wallet’s private spend key.

This whole process occurs without ever having George’s wallet
address publicly linked to any transaction.
As you can see, stealth addresses prevent outputs from being
associated with a recipient’s public address. This is accomplished by
the use of one-time destination public keys. One-time public keys are
only spendable by the recipient, and only the recipient is able to
detect their designated output on the blockchain. Since all outputs
are unlinkable, the privacy of the recipient is ensured. On the input
side of the transaction, the sender’s privacy is protected with the use
of ring signatures.

## Ring Signatures
A ring signature is a type of digital signature in which a group of
possible signers are fused together to produce a distinctive signature
that authorizes a transaction.

This is analogous to the signing of a check from a joint bank account,
but with the actual signer remaining unknown. The digital signature is
made up of the actual signer combined with non-signers to form a
“ring,” where all members are equal and valid. The actual signer is a
one-time spend key that corresponds with an output being spent
from the sender’s wallet. The non-signers are past transaction
outputs pulled from the blockchain, which act as decoys. These
outputs together make up the inputs of a transaction.

To a third party, all of the inputs appear equally likely to be the
output being spent in the transaction. This feature helps the sender
hide the origin of the transaction, by making all inputs
indistinguishable from each other.

You may now be asking yourself, “If there is no way for a third party
to verify which output is being spent, what would prevent someone
from spending the same output twice?” This potential issue is
addressed by the use of “key images.” 

A key image is a cryptographic key derived from an output being spent and is made part of every
ring signature transaction. There can exist only one key image for
each output on the blockchain, yet due to its cryptographic
properties, it is not possible to determine which output created which
key image. A list of all used key images are maintained in the
blockchain, enabling miners to verify that no outputs are spent twice.
Let’s go through an example to see how all this works.

Leo wants to send Monero to George with a “ringsize” value of five.
One of the five inputs will come from Leo’s wallet, which will be
consumed in the transaction. The other four inputs are arbitrarily
picked from the blockchain, and are used as decoys. This forms a
group of five possible signers, where all ring members are plausibly
the actual signer of the transaction. To an outside observer, including
to George himself, it’s not clear which input was truly signed by Leo’s
one-time spend key.

However, with the key image, the network is able to securely confirm
that the Monero being transferred to George has not been spent
before. As you can see, by using ring signatures, Monero protects the
privacy of the sender by obscuring the source of inputs, and in doing
so, ensures that the origin of any Monero remains untraceable.

Ring signatures protect senders’ privacy by preventing transaction
inputs from being distinguishable from one another. This is
accomplished by the use of digital signatures, where there is an
actual signer hidden among multiple ring members to authorize a
transaction. In addition, key images are used to prevent Monero
inputs from being spent more than once. Ring signatures ensure
privacy of the sender, since inputs are untraceable. To increase the
privacy of both parties in a transaction, Ring Confidential
Transactions (RingCT) has been implemented to hide transaction
amounts.

## Ring Confidential Transactions (RingCT)

Prior to the implementation of RingCT, Monero required transaction
amounts to be split into specific denominations. For example, an
output of 12.5 Monero would be broken up into three separate rings
in the amounts of 10, 2, and 0.5. This technique ensured that there
would be ample ring members, since a ring signature could only ring
together outputs of the same value.

However, a downside to this process is that an outside observer was
able to see the amounts transacted. To address this shortcoming,
Monero activated RingCT in January 2017. RingCT prevents privacy
leaks by hiding transaction amounts in the blockchain.

A month after RingCT was activated, approximately 98% of new
transactions were using the RingCT protocol. After September 2017,
the use of RingCT has become mandatory for all Monero
transactions.

Today with RingCT, newly created Monero firstly resides in outputs
that have visible amounts.

When new Monero is transferred for the first time, RingCT outputs
with masked amounts are generated. As a result, transactions no
longer need to be broken down into different denominations.

This means that a wallet is free to pick ring members from any RingCT
outputs, which significantly improves privacy. It should be noted that
Monero ring signatures cannot include both pre-RingCT outputs and
masked RingCT outputs in a single ring. So, like newly created
Monero, a pre-RingCT output must first be converted to a RingCT
output before it can be included in a ring signature with other RingCT
outputs. Let’s walk through an example and take a deep dive to see
how RingCT works.

Leo has an output of 12.56 and would like to send George 2.5
Monero. Since outputs cannot be spent twice, Leo needs to spend the
output in its entirety and return the change to himself. So, Leo’s
transaction would have one input of 12.56 Monero and 2 outputs -
one that is 2.5 Monero designated for George and another that is
10.06 Monero, which is sent back to his wallet as “change” of the
transaction. To prove that Monero has not been fraudulently
fabricated in a transaction, the sum of a transaction’s inputs must
equal the sum of its outputs.

Due to cryptographic properties of RingCT, Leo is required to
“commit” to the amount of an output, revealing just enough
information for the network to confirm the transaction, while not
publicly disclosing the amount he is spending. Although
commitments look like random numbers, miners are still able to
confirm that the amount of Monero being sent to George is the same
as the amount of funds available.

Another important aspect of a RingCT transaction is the “range
proof,” which prevents senders from committing to negative values in
order to secure the supply of Monero. A range proof
cryptographically proves the amounts used in a transaction is greater
than 0 and less than some arbitrary number. While an outside
observer is unable to see the actual amounts in outputs of a
transaction, they are able to confirm that the transaction is a
legitimate one that the network should accept.

Up to now, we have covered how Monero obfuscates information
stored on the blockchain. Ring signatures protect’s the senders
privacy, stealth addresses prevent outside observers from knowing
the receiving address, and RingCT hides the amount of Monero that is
transmitted. However, some personally identifiable information may
be leaked at the network level when making a transaction. This
privacy leak is addressed with Kovri.

## Kovri

Kovri is a free, decentralized, anonymity technology based on I2P’s
open specifications. Kovri uses both encryption and sophisticated
routing techniques to create a private overlay-network across the
Internet. This protected overlay allows users to hide their
geographical location and IP address. An IP address is like a home
address for the Internet, so this is quite sensitive information, to say
the least.

Let’s go through a few scenarios to see how this lightweight, securityfocused
software helps strengthen a user’s privacy.

Suppose Leo wants to send Monero to George. Leo’s wallet creates a
transaction and then broadcasts it to the Monero network.
The Monero network is made up of nodes that communicate with
each other by directing messages using IP addresses. This means that
it might be possible to geographically trace data as it travels over the
open Internet, from start to finish and everywhere in between. Even
though the sender’s and recipient’s wallet addresses - as well as the
amount of Monero sent - remain private, Leo is taking a risk in
broadcasting his transaction as some nodes may be logging IP
addresses.

An adversary with enough resources could attempt to associate
transactions with IP addresses to determine from where transactions
originate. This could potentially lead to an adversary not relaying his
transactions to the rest of the network; or, even worse, arriving at his
front door.

Now let’s imagine a different scenario. Suppose Justin wants to
support the Monero network by running a full node at his home.
After a few weeks, he receives a cease and desist letter from his
Internet Service Provider claiming that running a node is a violation of
the terms of service. Or consider this, suppose David is an operator of
a mining pool that donates a portion of block rewards to a political
party or controversial cause. Other nodes could purposefully reject
his solved blocks to express their disagreement with his political or
social views.

Leo, George, Justin, and David all have at least one thing in common:
their IP addresses were exposed. Users could try to hide IP addresses
with the Tor or a VPN; however both of these strategies have serious
weaknesses. The Tor network has “semi-trusted” Directory
Authorities, which give a handful of Tor node operators overreaching
influence into network consensus. Network consensus ultimately
determines who is allowed to relay traffic on the Tor network based
on the views of the Authorities. Furthermore, correlation attacks are
easily possible with trusted VPNs, making it easy for large attackers to
de-anonymize a user’s traffic.

So what can Leo, George, Justin, and David do to mitigate these
threats? They could use Kovri. If they exclusively use Kovri to connect
to the Monero network, no one will know their IP address, making
passive surveillance impractical, while substantially improving
Monero’s censorship resistance.

As you can see, Kovri is a software that allows users to send
transactions more privately than ever before. Let’s next go over some
technical details to have a better understanding of how Kovri works
under the hood.

Kovri tunnels traffic through the I2P network utilizing “garlic
encryption” and “garlic routing”. Information travels within a private
overlay-network by way of messages, which are encrypted in layers
each time the message is passed along to peers in the network,
similar to a Matryoshka doll. For each inner doll there is a lock and
public key to the next doll. Peers in the network are not able to read
the contents of the message being relayed, so information sent from
the sender to its destination (and vice-versa) are secured. The only
information visible to peers is the instruction for sending messages to
the next peer. To achieve greater privacy at a slight cost to
performance, users are able to connect to several peers. Essentially,
Kovri covers an application’s Internet traffic to make it anonymous
within the network.

Given this characteristic, Kovri is a great solution for anonymously
communicating over IRC, email, or accessing hidden services.
Kovri will revolutionize peer-to-peer connections and increase
network resiliency and privacy worldwide. Malicious nodes can no
longer threaten users who create transactions or block them from
propagating across the network. Kovri will come bundled with future
Monero releases and be enabled by default. In addition, Kovri will
feature a common API that would allow other cryptocurrencies and
applications to use it, not just Monero.

So, as you can see, every Monero transaction, by default, obfuscates
the sender, recipient, amount transacted, and (soon) will hide users’
geographical location and IP address. This “always-on” privacy means
that every Monero user’s activity enhances the privacy of all other
users, unlike selectively transparent cryptocurrencies (e.g. Zcash).

Lastly, by virtue of obfuscation, Monero cannot become tainted
through participation in previous transactions. This means Monero is
fungible and will always be accepted without the risk of censorship.

## Monero is fungible

If something is fungible, it is easily exchangeable or substitutable.
Many commonly traded commodities are fungible. Any given ton of
copper can be exchanged for a different ton of copper, or a barrel of
oil for another barrel of oil.

The cleanest example of a fungible object is money. A dollar is a
dollar is a dollar, whether you received it as a gift, found it on the
floor, or earned it by working. A dollar is also a dollar whether it’s a
dollar bill in your wallet, four quarters in a bowl of loose change, or a
number on the screen when you check your bank balance online. It
all has the same value. Money is fungible.

Now, let’s compare Bitcoin and Monero in terms of fungibility. In this
comparison, transaction history will play an important role.

Bitcoin is not considered fungible, because its transparent blockchain
allows anyone to trace where a Bitcoin came from. Let’s assume that
you legally received a Bitcoin that had been used, previously, in a
nefarious transaction. When that Bitcoin arrives in your wallet, it
would be possible to look into the transaction of that specific Bitcoin
and detect whether or not it had been used for an illicit activity. If that
Bitcoin was used for such an act, it could be deemed as “dirty” and
could be blacklisted by a merchant that accepts Bitcoin or even an
exchange where you could trade that Bitcoin for another
cryptocurrency.
