# Chapter 4

# Blocks and Mining
It’s time to learn about blockchain technology and how Monero miners keep the ledger secure. We’ll begin with what a “block” contains, the way that they’re linked int tamper-proof chain, and how the miners use “proof of work” to arrive at “consensus” on an agreed version. On the topic of miners, we’ll discuss the source of new Moneroj, and how the coins are released into the ecosystem. Toward the end of the chapter, we’ll dip our toes into a a few cryptography concepts (“hashes” and “nonces”) to really understand what the miners are actually working on.

## The simplified anatomy of a block
The previous chapter discussed the way transactions are constructed. In summary, your wallet drafts a message with instructions to transfer one of your outputs to a new recipient. Sensitive information in the message (sender, receiver, amount) is cryptographically obscured, then your wallet authorizes the message by digitally signing it with your private key.

Now we consider how this message is processed by the network, to enact the actual transfer. Your message is received and relayed by “nodes” on the Monero network, which place your pending transaction in the “memory pool.” The Monero miners collect pending transactions from the memory pool, and bundle them together into “blocks.” A simplified block is shown below:

[image]

As shown above, each block block contains a set of pending transactions, a cryptographic link to the previous block (called a “hash”), and a place for the miner to include a special string that completes the block (called a “nonce).

If you want to learn how hashes and nonces work, there is a friendly introduction with examples toward the end of this chapter (you can skip ahead [link] and read it now if you’re curious about the cryptography.) There are only two concepts that you need to know in order to understand how these techniques function to secure the blockchain:

1) The “hash” is a security feature that proves that each block is directly linked to an unaltered version of the previous block. If an attacker tries to tamper with any point in the ledger, even the smallest attempt will be blatantly obvious because the hashes will raise a red flag on every subsequent block.

2) The “nonce” is a special string that completes the block and marks it as prepared for the blockchain. It is extremely computationally difficult to find a nonce that satisfies the requirements necessary to finalize and seal a block. Miners spend most of their time and energy searching for valid nonces. It is impossible to plan ahead for calculating the nonces, and the search must start from scratch with each new block. Nonces are not mathematically meaningful; only one-time strings of random characters.

## Miners add new blocks to the longest chain

The miners collect pending transactions from the memory pool, and verify their authenticity by checking that the cryptographic proofs and signatures are valid, and that the key image has not been used before (see the chapter 3 section on ring signatures [link], to review why this is important). They collect the valid transactions into that portion of the block, and calculate the hash for the previous block to include as a cryptographic link. Lastly, the miner labors to identify a nonce that can be used to complete the block.

At any given moment, there are thousands of miners all working separately (or in teams, known as “pools”) to be the first to find a nonce that completes the current block of transactions. Whichever miner finds a nonce and finalizes their block first announces their version to the rest of the network. This miner is paid by receiving brand-new Moneroj called the “block reward,” which is discussed more in the section describing Proof of Work. Upon receiving the completed block, the other miners all add it to their copy of the blockchain, increasing the chain’s “height” by one block. Transactions added to the blockchain are removed from the memory pool, and the other miners discard their own (incomplete) work on that block in order to begin preparing the next one. 


The global nature of the Monero ecosystem and unpredictable transmission delays due to network latency mean that occasionally two miners will independently complete slightly-different blocks at the same height. For example, a miner in South America might be the first to complete a block, however another miner in Europe finishes work on a similar block (containing the same transactions) before receiving the broadcast from South America. In this case, the western hemisphere may be temporarily using a different blockchain from the eastern hemisphere. For a brief moment, there exist two competing Monero ledgers that may not contain all of the transactions. One might think that this would be a catastrophic occurrence! 

On the contrary, this situation is easily resolved by elegantly imposing a simple rule: miners all agree to work on the solving the next block in the longest chain. This is the central idea to “consensus,” which allows the Monero network to nimbly reunite to a single chain after an accidental split. Instead of trying to resolve the discrepant blocks immediately, the miners just continue trying to solve the next block on whichever chain they are synced to. Within the next few minutes, one of the miners will solve a subsequent block and add it to their chain. As soon as this occurs, their version is the longest chain, so all of the miners unanimously adapt that copy and discard the other “orphaned” block. Any transactions that were in the orphaned block will be re-mined in the next chain, so there is no cause for concern. By simply following whichever chain mines a block next, the network completely resolves any splits and returns to consensus on a single universal ledger.

## Monero taxis use a hard puzzle to ensure fairness

These validation and block preparation tasks described above are not computationally difficult. The “hard” part for the miner is finding a nonce that allows them to complete the block. This is a puzzle designed to be extremely challenging and solvable only by brute force testing solutions; there is no way to shortcut the process or mathematically narrow down the search for a valid nonce. Miners simply generate random strings and test whether they complete the block, by trial and error.

The presence of this arbitrary obstacle may seem peculiar at first! The miners carry out a computationally-easy crucial role for the network (validating transactions) but are required to carry out a useless difficult task (finding the nonce) in order to submit their answer. 

To understand the reasoning behind this, consider the hypothetical Monero Taxicab Network with only a few vehicles, and many taxi drivers that can check out one of the cabs if they submit an approved route. Throughout the day, potential riders call in and request rides all over the city. All of the requests from riders who have not been picked up are collected in a real-time “pool” of pending rides. Instead of a central taxi authority assigning each incoming ride to a car or driver, each taxi driver looks at the pool and puts together their own list of 5 - 10 trips that they could complete in the next 20 minutes. This part of route/ride planning is easy and fast for experienced taxi drivers! Once a driver puts together a list of trips that they can complete in the next “block” of rides, they complete a final task described below, then submit their route to the Monero Taxicab Network. If the driver has proposed a valid route with real pending riders, then the plan is approved! The riders included on the taxi driver’s plan are removed from the pending pool, the taxi driver checks out a vehicle, and travelers are soon shuttled to their destinations. The taxi driver is rewarded with a fixed-size commission for carrying out the route, and the driver also collects fare from each of the riders.

So far, this should seem fairly intuitive! Pending trips are listed in a pool; when a taxi driver successfully submits a proposed block of trips that includes a given pending traveler, the rider is removed from the pool and shuttled to their destination. However, the Monero Taxicab Network has a very peculiar rule: in order for a driver to submit their plan for a block of rides to the Monero Network, they must do some difficult useless task. Imagine that the driver must scramble all of the letters in the riders’ destination addresses and use some of them to generate five sentences (> 50 words total) that can say anything, but must have correct grammar/spelling in the local language. A driver submitting a planned route must include both the list of rides and the nonsense (“nonce”) sentences that match the letters in the destinations, or else their route will be automatically rejected.  There are multiple valid nonce sentences that can be constructed from most sets of letters, and the resulting sentences are absolutely meaningless for anything besides submitting that set of rides to the Monero Taxicab Network.

A property of this type of task, which will have parallels in the Monero cryptocurrency, is that it is very hard to find a nonce, but very easy to verify. For this taxi scenario, is quite difficult to rearrange a dozen addresses into 50 words in meaningful sentences by hand. However, it is easy for somebody else to review the nonce result to see whether it contains 5 valid sentences. When a driver submits their nonce in the format shown below, you can very quickly check that “Apple jam is very bad” is a valid sentence, and that letters are uniquely drawn from the rider destinations. This verification is nearly instantaneous, compared to the time it took the driver to rearrange the letters and find several sentences.

[image]

A seasoned taxi driver would be able to plan the driving route from the trip list in less than 60 seconds, however it will probably take them a few minutes to rearrange letters and find find nonce sentences by hand. In fact, most of their effort in preparing their proposed route block will be spent on finding this useless nonce. 

Imagine this process from a taxi driver’s perspective, beginning right after the last route was assigned. You quickly pull down several trips from the list of pending rides and begin working furiously to rearrange letters from the destinations into some kind of nonce sentence. For a few minutes, you and all of the other taxi drivers are working on the same list of pending rides, each trying to craft a long enough nonce with > 50 words. Suddenly, a different driver submits a list of the rides along with a completed nonce. All of the trips that you were working on disappear from the pool! You have to throw away your work on that block (since the riders are already en route) and switch to the next set of pending trips. The process to find a valid nonce for that set of riders begins again from scratch, based on the new set of letters in their destinations.

Why would the Monero Taxicab Network impose such a difficult useless task upon their drivers? It is actually their surefire way to ensure that customers are served fairly! Imagine that a few of the taxi drivers behave unethically in some way, perhaps ignoring pending rides called in from a certain part of town, or selecting only the riders that are going to businesses that have bribed those unfair drivers. Without the nonce requirement, these small groups or individual malicious drivers might dominate the ride selection process for the whole business by constantly submitting their (unfair or exclusionary) routes as soon as a car becomes available. In this way, they could systematically treat some groups of customers poorly, which is absolutely antithetical to the core principles of the Monero Taxicab Network, which is dedicated to serving all riders fairly. 

The nonce task competition between many taxi drivers is crucial to Monero’s goal of ensuring that cars and rides are provided fairly. Assuming that all of the taxi drivers can rearrange letters at roughly the same speed as each other, it will be somewhat random which driver lucks into a solution and is allowed to submit their block of plans first. It is unlikely that any driver could be the first to submit multiple block plans in a row (i.e. be the first to find nonce sentences for several sequential blocks) since each driver is competing against, and collectively outnumbered by, all of the other drivers.

Most of the multitude of potential drivers will be honest individuals, submitting fair ride block plans to keep the city running smoothly. If there are a few malicious drivers who wish to submit unfair plans, the nonce task prevents them from controlling the entire system. Statistically, they will occasionally be the first to find the nonce, and thus able to submit their exclusionary route plan for that block. However, the rest of the drivers, most of whom are honest, will immediately begin working on their fair blocks to propose for the next set of rides! Due to the random nature of who lucks into finding a nonce first, the next set of rides is most likely to go to an honest driver who will include the overlooked trips.

This system of imposing useless work to randomize which drivers’ routes are accepted allows the Monero Taxicab Network to be sure that the majority of honest drivers are gaining access to the cars to carry out business fairly. The Monero Taxicab Network thus has no central authority that is responsible or liable for controlling ride activity and assignment. Instead, this task is “decentralized” to the individual drivers, employing the useless nonce competition to randomly select which route proposal is accepted. This statistically that the cars will usually go to honest drivers, so the Monero Taxicab Network has an excellent reputation for providing fair service to all customers.

By now you’re probably wondering how this extended taxicab metaphor is related to the cryptocurrency that this book is ostensibly about! You’ve probably guessed that the decentralized Monero Taxicab Network is an overt analogy for the Monero cryptocurrency network, which needs to provide fair global service without any central authority (the importance of trustless decentralization is discussed in Chapter 1 [link]). Each trip corresponds to a Monero transaction, pending in the memory pool until it is selected for a spot in the car/block. The taxi drivers represent miners. Both carry out an easy important jobs (taxi drivers plan routes; miners collect and validate transactions), yet are forced to compete against other drivers/miners in a useless difficult nonce task, so that the barrier randomizes who succeeds first - thus statistically distributing most of the cars/blocks to honest drivers/miners. Whichever taxi driver submits their route first was rewarded with a fixed-size commission, and fare from each of the riders who attained a seat. Likewise, miners are rewarded with a commission (called the “coinbase” or “block reward”) for solving each block, and also collect fees from the transactions included in the block. 

## Cryptocurrency “proof of work” concepts

Now we’ll step away from the taxi analogy and directly discuss the systems in place to ensure fairness in Monero. This process of coupling important network functions with  useless nonce work is referred to as a “Proof of Work” system. Many cryptocurrencies operate on various PoW systems; there are differences between the implementations and their characteristics, however they share a common theme of enforcing decentralization by requiring validation to be submitted with a nonce. Sometimes the nonce itself is referred to as the “proof of work,” referring to the piece of data that was hard to find/create and easy to verify, like the taxi drivers’ anagrams. 

Miners measure how quickly they can work toward mining blocks in “hashes per second”, abbreviated H/s. Each miner can measure their “hashrate,” which varies depending on the equipment that they are using to mine. The “network hashrate” refers to the total hashrate of all the miners working on preparing blocks.

## PoW systems prevent censorship

In PoW systems, the miners compete at finding nonces to randomize which miner’s block is accepted first, becoming the latest block on the longest chain. As mentioned in the taxi analogy, the PoW framework prevents effective censorship. Some malicious miner in the Monero network may try to provide preferential treatment or exclude certain transactions, however an honest Monero miner will simply include those transactions in the next block.

## PoW systems prevent double-spend attacks

There is another blockchain challenge solved by PoW systems that was not included in the taxi analogy. Specifically, a malicious miner might try to “double spend” a transaction. This refers to an attack where the miner creates blocks to undo their past transactions and steal back the money for themselves. The attack would have to proceed in this manner:

* Malicious miner Martin uses his first transaction to send Moneroj to victim Valerie
* When the “Martin → Valerie” transaction is mined onto the blockchain, Valerie believes she has been paid.
* Martin takes whatever he was buying from Valerie…
* Then mines a different version of the block that contained the “Martin → Valerie” transaction.
* In Martin’s alternative version, the transaction to Valerie doesn’t exist! Instead, his second version contains a transaction that sends that Moneroj to one of his wallets, instead of Valerie’s
* If the Martin can quickly mine enough blocks to make his chain the longest, then the network will accept his alternate reality. In practice, the infeasibility of this step prevents double-spend attacks from actually occurring.
* Since the key image for Martin’s output appears on the chain (now associated with the transaction to himself), the network will no longer accept the “Martin → Valerie” transaction as valid since the key image associated with that output is already spent.

At this point, Martin has left with whatever he bought from Valerie and stolen back the Moneroj that he initially used to pay her. Thankfully, PoW systems prevent an attacker from sustaining this type of double-spend attack, by limiting the speed with which they can generate blocks. Recall that miners will always follow the longest blockchain, so the malicious miner would have to change the block with the previous transaction then re-mine every block afterward, fast enough to overtake the length of the main chain. Since the attacker will be working alone to generate the altered blocks, against the hash rate of the entire rest of the network building the real blockchain, they will be unable to catch up. This type of attack could only feasibly succeed if the malicious miner has as much computing power as the entire rest of the network combined. For this reason, the term “51% attack” is often used to indicate that some sort of malicious activity would require majority hash rate.

A cryptocurrency with more miners will be more difficult to attack in this way, since the malicious miner must have more computing power than the rest of the global network. This is why increasing the total hashrate by including more miners helps to secure the network against attacks.

## PoW difficulty adjustment controls blocktime

For practical considerations, the Monero network aims to add a new block onto the chain approximately every two minutes. With each mined block, some transactions are moved from the pending memory pool onto the confirmed blockchain. If the average blocktime becomes too long, transactions will be too slow to confirm. If the average blocktime is too short, then the network could get out of sync more often and run into more issues. 

The network controls how fast blocks are mined by adjusting the “difficulty” of the nonce puzzle. As more miners join the network over time, their collective guessing power (hashrate) means that they will be able to search for nonces more quickly. This would statistically cause miners to find blocks faster than the target blocktime of 2 minutes. So the difficulty of the puzzle is increased, meaning that it is takes longer to find a nonce that matches the arbitrary requirements. Likewise, the difficulty can be adjusted to be easier if mining power decreases and blocks start being mined too infrequently. 

In the taxi network analogy from the previous section, the difficulty of the letter rearrangement task could be similarly arbitrarily adjusted by requiring more or fewer words in the nonce sentences. If 20% of the taxi drivers (miners) did not participate one day, then it would take longer on average for route plan blocks (completed with nonces) to be submitted, so some cars would be idling with no driver. To correct this, the taxi drivers would agree to lower the nonce requirements from 50 words to 40 words. This would put the drivers back in sync with the availability of cars.

Difficulty increases proportionally with total network hashrate to keep the flow of blocks constant. 

## Monero uses a modified CryptoNight PoW function

Monero uses the CryptoNight PoW algorithm, which is significantly different than the systems used by most other cryptocurrencies. The most notable difference Monero’s deliberate use of an PoW function that is difficult to optimize for specialized mining equipment.

 In most contexts, ‘optimization’ is a good thing, so you might be surprised that Monero’s PoW algorithm intentionally stymies accelerating mining speeds. This is because the ability to create overpowered mining equipment can lead to a dangerous centralization of miners. These risks are perfectly illustrated in the history of Bitcoin  mining.
 
 ### The history of Bitcoin mining

When cryptocurrencies entered the scene with Bitcoin’s appearance in 2009, mining occurred exclusively on computer CPUs. Since the network mining difficulty adjusts to the current total hashrate, CPU mining was adequately profitable in the early days. CPU miners have hashing power on the order of 1,000,000 H/s, written as 1 MH/s for convenience.

Soon, graphics cards were repurposed for mining cryptocurrencies. GPUs are able to attack the mining problem orders of magnitude faster, around 100 MH/s. Since the network difficulty adjusted based on the GPU miners, the CPU miners could not compete (i.e. mining rewards were insufficient to pay for the equipment and electricity costs).

Next, application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) were built for the sole purpose of mining Bitcoin. These special devices are quite expensive, and mine many thousands of times faster than GPUs - more than 1,000,000 MH/s. By now, the network difficulty has increased to accommodate the ASICs, consequently pushing CPU and GPU miners out of business for Bitcoin.

Bitcoin was initially launched with the vision that anybody in the world with a computer could begin mining to secure the network and obtain Bitcoin. Unfortunately, the creation and proliferation of ASICs very effectively ended this dream. If you wish to begin mining Bitcoin now, you will have to obtain an ASIC for hundreds or thousands of Euros. 

This ASIC takeover put the vast majority of Bitcoin miners out of business. The network began its existence secured by scores of computer geeks scattered across the globe, all participating on their personal computers and graphics cards. Sadly, this true decentralization of Bitcoin is a bygone era. Now the network is dominated by several large corporations with massive ASIC farms, who have effectively become the Bitcoin backbone.

## ASIC centralization is dangerous

Since many of the main cryptocurrencies are dominated by ASIC miners, it is worth giving consideration to the topic and its risks. Centralization occurs in two forms: ASICs are only produced by a few companies (centralization of manufacturing) and subsequent mining tends to be limited to a few large farms (centralization of mining).

Centralization of ASIC manufacturing and mining to a few large corporations allows hackers, attackers, and governments to exert larger control over the network and its regulation. This begins to nullify many of the benefits of decentralization. For example:

* Universal access to mining flourished in the days of CPU and GPU mining, which uses unregulated general-purpose hardware. However, mining now requires specialized hardware, which is at much greater risk of regulation and control. It is not unlikely that some government may impose bans or require licenses to manufacture/own ASICs.

* Censorship resistance is hindered if mining farms that mine most of the blocks are pressured into confirming or censoring certain transactions. It would be difficult to exert this influence over a global collection of ameteur miners, and much easier to impose this kind of activity on centralized mining corporations.

* The potential for an ASIC killswitch is a major concern, since a malicious manufacturer (or one that is following government orders) may include a way to remotely control or shut down their miners. This creates a single point of failure, whose activation would instantly kill most of the network hashrate. This would plunge the network into a sudden vulnerable state with dramatically lessened hashrate to secure the currency.

The ASIC takeover of Bitcoin is complete. While there are still some small-time miners with ASICS working in pools, large mining farms dominate the network hashrate. Concerningly, the majority of Bitcoin ASICs are designed, manufactured, and shipped by a single manufacturer - in stark contrast to the Bitcoin’s early days, when miners used every brand, model, and flavor of CPU and GPU to mine.

## Monero’s CryptoNight PoW actively resists ASICs

Due to underlying egalitarian principles, the Monero community does not approve of ASICs and their inevitable centralization of mining power. While the “CPU-hard” hash algorithm (SHA-256) used by Bitcoin is amenable to ASIC optimization, Monero deters ASIC development by using a “memory-hard” algorithm (CryptoNight) that is difficult to accelerate. [link to: https://cryptonote.org/whitepaper.pdf] Consequently, CPU and GPU mining are both feasible for Monero, even in 2018. There are currently billions of existing devices (any modern x86 CPU and many GPUs) that are capable of mining Monero, so the process is accessible to any internet-connected individual. In fact, it is even possible to mine Monero in a web browser from any phone or computer!

In early March 2018, the Monero community was shocked to learn that CryptoNight ASICs (or similar devices known as field-programmable gate arrays) had been secretly produced and were mining Monero! These devices purported to mine Monero 25 times faster than the leading GPUs, and retrospective hashrate analysis suggests that they accounted for nearly half of the Monero network hashrate in late 2017 and early 2018. 

Since the CryptoNote algorithm was designed as a memory-hard function specifically to “close the gap between CPU(majority) and GPU/FPGA/ASIC (minority) miners,” the existence of these ASICs was an unexpected discovery. While the CryptoNote authors observe that, “It is appropriate that some users can have a certain advantage over others,” they propose that “their  investments  should  grow  at  least  linearly  with  the  power.” Naturally, a newer computer or a nicer graphics card will mine more efficiently than older equipment, but ASICs create an extremely disproportionate distribution of hashrate.

The Monero community reacted quickly, proactively taking steps to mitigate ASIC mining before the existence of the devices was even fully confirmed. The spring 2018 Monero routine upgrade included a minor tweak to the CryptoNight algorithm, designed to affect ASICs differently than GPU/CPU miners. This slight variation did not change the difficulty or behavior of the algorithm, so the CPU/GPU miners were able to  easily adjust to the new variant when they automatically upgraded with the network.

ASICs, on the other hand, are fundamentally incapable of adapting to new (minor or major) variations. One can think of ASICs as workers that are trained to do one task extremely quickly, but cannot learn to do anything else. The algorithm to be executed is physically etched into the ASIC circuits, so they cannot be reprogrammed or repurposed. 

When the minor CryptoNote tweak was implemented at block 1546000, the ASICs became instantly incompatible with the network, and approximately half of the total hashrate vanished instantly. Since the ASICs were unable to adjust to process blocks by a modified algorithm, any blocks they produce are now immediately rejected by the Monero network as invalid.

For the time being, it appears that the Monero network has successfully removed the unexpected ASIC threat. The Monero development team has expressed intent to similarly trivially modify the mining algorithm at each network update. Since Monero carries out routine hard forks every 6 months, this should permanently disincentivize attempts to produce Monero ASICs, since each expensive and lengthy redesign would be promptly rendered obsolete.

## A note on PoW alternatives

There are alternative systems for maintaining fairness besides proof of work; examples include proof of stake, proof of space, proof of bandwidth, and even hybrids between multiple types. Each system has its own strengths and drawbacks. PoW is currently the most widely used and field-tested consensus mechanism, and the only one system currently employed by Monero.

## Miners are paid for their service

### Two sources of income

Each time a miner successfully mines a block (i.e. is the first to find a nonce that completes the next block on the longest chain) they are paid two different ways.
	
First, the miner collects fees that were included with the transactions. Monero users can increase the likelihood that a miner includes their transaction sooner by increasing its associated fee. 

Secondly, the miner receives a reward for contributing a solved block of validated transactions. This “block reward” is like the fixed-size commission the taxi network paid the drivers that submitted successful routes. All miners, upon receiving and confirming the solved block, add this freshly-minted “coinbase” to the address of the miner found the valid nonce first. 

This is how all new Moneroj are created, as payment to the first network participant find a nonce for the next set of pending transactions.

### All Moneroj originate as “block rewards” to miners

It is a common misconception that miners are finding or creating coins. Actually, miners are simply validating transactions, and are paid for their work with new coins. This introduction of new Moneroj is referred to as “coin emission.” 

When Monero was launched, block reward started at more than 30 XMR per 2 minutes. This reward smoothly decreases until it will reach 0.6 XMR per 2-minute block in 2022. Monero’s continuous decrease is designed to provide a more stable environment for miners, compared to the dramatic “halving” events that some cryptocurrencies use to periodically sharply cut the block reward. After 2022, Monero’s “tail emission” will stay constant, guaranteeing that mining a block will always reward 0.6 XMR. 

Many cryptocurrencies have a fixed cap on coin emission, with a hard limit on maximum supply. This means that at some point there will be no new coins introduced for miners, who will be forced to subsist entirely on fees. For example, in Bitcoin, this change will occur in 2040, when the supply reaches 21 million Bitcoin and ceases to increase any further. This approach is often touted as a benefit to remain “deflationary,” however these arguments are often based on conflating the concept of inflating monetary supply with a different use of the word “inflation” to describe an undesirable decrease in spending power of a currency. Monero implements the tail emission, with < 1% annual supply inflation, to ensure that future miners are always rewarded for their service and financially incentivised to use their mining power to secure the Monero network.

## Cryptographic tools for proof of work

Throughout this chapter, we’ve focused on the functionality of hashes and nonces, describing them primarily through analogies. If you want to learn how they really work, the remainder of the chapter introduces the actual cryptographic principles.

### Hashes (general concept)

Hash functions are a cryptographic tool that output a unique number for each input. These algorithms are designed so that any alteration to the input, even very minor changes, will result in an entirely different output. The term “hash” can be used to refer to both the function itself, and its output for a particular input.

Adding, removing, or changing even a single character will result in a totally different hash. Consider the message “Please send 50 euros to Jen.”. We can run the string through one of these algorithms to produce its hash “a2d2a9059ed8d323” The below table shows how the hash output changes dramatically with any modification of the input:

Input | Output | Comment
--- | --- | ---
Please send 50 EUR to Jen. | a2d2a9059ed8d323 | True message
Please send 500 EUR to Jen. | 05cbdd8dd96718ac | Added an extra ‘0’ to amount
Please send 60 EUR to Jen. | f5087a90b63b1777 | Changed ‘5’ to ‘6’
Please send 50 EUR to Jon. | ffd424b7077a3c58 | Changed recipient to ‘Jon’
Please send 50 EUR to Jen. | a2d2a9059ed8d323 | Same input = same output!

     The example output here is the first 16 characters of each input’s SHA-256 hash
	$ echo {input} | sha256sum | cut -c1-16

Hash functions are heavily utilized throughout cryptocurrency security features. Each block starts with the hash of the entire previous block. This is central to the immutability (tamper-proof characteristics) of the blockchain, since any attempts to change data in previous blocks will result in an entirely different hash output. Because the relationship between hash inputs and hash outputs is unpredictable and impossible to reverse-engineer, an attacker could not change the data in a block and create the exact same hash. Since each block includes a reference to the hash of the block before it, any modification attempt will be obvious on all subsequent blocks. 

This idea of an expanding database with each group of entries cryptographically secured by hashes to the previous iteration is a key concept behind the blockchain revolution. 

## Nonces (general concept)

The term “nonce” refers to a valid to a puzzle that is not inherently physically/mathematically meaningful. For example, consider the following “fill-in-the-blank” questions that a teacher might give their students:

Puzzle A) The Esperanto word for "c___" inspired the name “Monero”
	Acceptable answer: “coin”
Puzzle B) 1 kilogram is equal to "_____" grams. 
	Acceptable answer: 1000
Puzzle C) This 3-digit prime number "3___" does not repeat any digits
	Acceptable nonces: any of {307, 317, 347, 349, 359, etc…}
Puzzle D) This 5-digit prime number "7___" does not repeat any digits 
	Acceptable nonces: any of {71263, 72169, 73609, 74869, etc…}

Puzzle A and B are both meaningful, and each have one correct answer (A: “coin” B: “1000”) that the student will want to remember for future problems. Thus, these answers are not considered “nonces”

However, puzzles C and D are both “busy work” tasks that are hard to solve, and do not contribute insight to any real problem. There are multiple solutions that all satisfy the nonce requirement; for question C, the answer “359” is equally as valid as “307.” 

A student that spends an hour testing various numbers to come up with the answer “359” for puzzle C has to start the search for a valid nonce from scratch upon encountering each variation on the puzzle, e.g. “This 3-digit prime number “6___” does not repeat any digits.”

## Hashes and Nonces in PoW

Cryptocurrencies use the hash of each block to be sure that its contents have not been changed, since modifying a single character would be clearly reflected in a radically-different hash (which propagates through subsequent blocks). The hash of a block includes all of its contents: transactions, headers, the hash of the previous block, and a nonce field.

To work on solving a block, the miners must randomly guess at values for the nonce, attempting to  find one that causes the hash of the entire block to produce an output below a certain threshold, which is determined by the current network difficulty. Since it is impossible to predict how changing the inputs to a hash function will affect its outputs, the miners simply have to brute force random nonces over and over again until they find one that produces an output hash below the threshold.

The network changes raises or lowers this threshold to adjust the mining difficulty, in order to maintain a 2-minute block time independent of changes in the total hashrate.


