# Chapter 6

# Monero deep

## Introduction 

The cryptography behind Monero is what makes it more secure, private, and untraceable than all other cryptocurrencies. This chapter will take a deep dive into it's cryptography features. Due to the mathmetical nature of cryptography, this chapter is the most technical of this book. So, to start at the basics, we'll begin with Maths primitives.

# Maths Fundamentals

## Prime number

Recall that a prime number is an integer (a whole number) that has as its only factors 1 and itself (for example, 2, 17, 23, and 127 are prime). We’ll be working a lot with prime numbers, since they have some special properties associated with them.

## Euclidean Division

In arithmetic, Euclidean division is the process of division of two integers, which produces a quotient and a remainder smaller than the divisor. Its main property is that the quotient and remainder exist and are unique, under some conditions.

## A mod B

Given two positive numbers, a (the dividend) and b (the divisor), a modulo b (abbreviated as a mod b) is the remainder r of the Euclidean division of a by b.

## Cartesian Coordinate System

A Cartesian coordinate system is a coordinate system that specifies each point uniquely in a plane by a pair of numerical coordinates, which are the signed distances to the point from two fixed perpendicular directed lines, measured in the same unit of length.
Each reference line is called a coordinate axis or just axis (plural axes) of the system, and the point where they meet is its origin, at ordered pair (0, 0).

Each point of a 2D representation of Cartesian Coordinate System has two values ( x ; y) that describes the position of the point in relation to the original axes.

## Elliptic Curve


Typically, elliptic curves are defined as the set of points (x, y) satisfying an equation:

y^2 = x^3 + ax + b

# Cryptography deep

A cryptographic primitive is an algorithm that serves as the building block for cryptographic protocols. Monero uses a wide variety of cryptographic primitives for various use cases, which will be discussed in depth throughout this chapter.

Monero uses a wide variety of cryptographic primitives for various use cases.

Comparing to Bitcoin, Monero uses much more primitives, and some of them are more advanced, especially those related to privacy and Proof of Work. Some choices are deliberately non-standard (for better or worse) - oftentimes a legacy of the CryptoNote protocol.  

Comparing to various altcoins, the multiple primitives of Monero cryptography is often considered more conservative, sound and robust. So let's take a look at what they are specifically.

## Monero PseudoRandom Number Generation (PRNG)

A pseudorandom number generator (PRNG), also known as a deterministic random bit generator (DRBG), is an algorithm for generating a sequence of numbers whose properties approximate the properties of sequences of random numbers. The PRNG-generated sequence is not truly random, because it is completely determined by an initial value, called the PRNG's seed (which may include truly random values).

Monero uses PRNG based on the Keccak hashing function. Basically, output of the previous hashing round is input for the next one.

The initial seed comes from entropy sources provided by operating system. On Linux and MacOS the seed comes from /dev/urandom. On Windows the WinAPI CryptGenRandom call is used for seeding.

This concerns the reference C++ implementation of Monero. Please note there are many alternative implementations of private key generation, including JavaScript, Python, Android/Java. These should be researched case by case for correctness.

## Hashing

Hashes are one-way mathematical functions that take a variable length input of any size and produces a unique fixed length output called a hash value. This function is considered as 'one way' as it is very difficult to find the original input of a hash value. This is unless you try to brute force guess all existing inputs to find a matching hash value.

(If you are interested in the security of the hash function, check out this video: [Security of SHA-256](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S9JGmA5_unY))

The hash function that Monero uses, follows the design of SHA3-256 hash function. Here is an example of a hash input and a typical output. You can play with the SHA-3 256 hash function yourself here.

SHA-3 256(Hello world) -> 64EC88CA00B268E5BA1A35678A1B5316D212F4F366B2477232534A8AECA37F3C

The magic of hash functions is that they are deterministic. This means that if you change the input in any shape or way, the output will also change. The same message will ALWAYS result in the same hash value. It is difficult to generate the same hash value with two different inputs however it is possible ~ this is called a collision. They are mathematically unlikely but can they be reproduced with certain hash functions such as the cryptographically defunct SHA-1 and MD5 functions.

Hash functions are mainly used for securing the integrity of information and thus also can act as unique identifiers. Since hash functions are deterministic, they are able to prove that certain pieces of information have not been tampered with. If information is tampered with, it will produce a different hash to the original version.

This is a core underlying property that secures proof of work (PoW) blockchains. Lets take a look at how... In essence, blockchains are linearly chained ‘blocks’ of data. These blocks are known as Merkle trees, a hash value generated from 'trees' of other hashes. With each respective block, their hash value is generated with along with the hash of the previous block. Thus if you were to change something in the past history of the blockchain data, it would deterministically change the hash value of the block in front of it, causing a 'chain' reaction, resulting in a totally different blockchain made of different hash values.

Unless it is accepeted by the majority of the nodes that validate blocks of data, it is rejected as invalid. To overcome all of this, this you would not only have to recompute all the hashed blocks to form the new chain but also have enough computing power to out compete the production of other block creators. Hashes protect the integrity of data.

### Hashing and address generation

For generating addresses (especially public address), it's important to hash keys. Hashing is a protection for the problem of pseudorandom generation of numbers. Sometimes the algorithm could be predictable and that w

Monero employs Keccak as a hashing function. In most contexts specifically a special version of this is used, called Keccak-256, providing 32-byte hashes.

Choosing a good hashing algorithm is a must for creating addresses in a secure way. If it generates the same addresses, there will be a "collision" (two people will have the same seed, so same private and public keys).

### Keccak

Keccak is the leading hashing function, designed by non-NSA designers. Keccak won NIST competition to become the official SHA3. It is used for transaction and block hashing.

## Digital Signatures

In the real world, we use signatures as an act of deliberation from someone where it is used as a to agree with documents and claim authorship of work. While relatively straightforward, signatures actually have a lot of meta properties tied to them. 

Unforgeable: The signature is unique to the signer and thus is proof of an identity
Unalterable: The signature cannot be altered or moved to another document
Nonrepudiable: The signature cannot be revoked afterward
Signatures in real life can be forged and which is an even bigger problem with digital signatures as files are easily copied and tampered with. How can you achieve a sign of deliberation that satisfies all the requirements of a signature? The answer is in a public key cryptography algorithm called the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA).

For Person A to sign a document, a hash value is produced from that document using a hash function. Person A uses the encryption key, which is kept hidden, to encrypt the hash value of the document to produce a cipher-text: E(H). For DSA, the encryption key is the private key that is kept a secret and the decryption key is the public key that is published into the open. Person A publishes the document and along with the E(H). Anyone can verify that person A has signed the document by hashing the document and then using Person A’s trusted and published decryption key to decrypt the cipher-text E(H) to produce the same hash of the document. If the document hashes match, then the signature is valid.

The signature it is never exposed but rather the key used for encryption. The uniquely transformed cipher-text is the signature.

## Base58

Base58 is a group of binary-to-text encoding schemes used to represent large integers as alphanumeric text. 

It is similar to another scheme called Base64 but has been modified to avoid both non-alphanumeric characters and letters which might look ambiguous when printed. 

It is therefore designed for human users who manually enter the data, copying from some visual source, but also allows easy copy and paste because a double-click will usually select the whole string.

Base58 Alphabet used in Monero:

123456789ABCDEFGHJKLMNPQRSTUVWXYZabcdefghijkmnopqrstuvwxyz

Note: Zero (0) along with the letters I (uppercase i), O (uppercase o), and l (lowercase L) are not present in this Base58 alphabet as they are the previously mentioned characters which might appear ambiguous.

# The relationships between seeds, address and keys

Before we get into the Monero deep, we have to introduce the concept of address generation.

## Elliptic curve



However, the cryptocurrency Monero uses a special curve known to offer improved security over other commonly used NIST curves, as well as excellent performance of cryptographic primitives.

The curve used belongs to the category of s.c. Twisted Edwards curves, which are commonly expressed as:
ax^2 + y^2 = 1 + dx^2y^2

## Ed25519 Function

Monero uses a particular Twisted Edwards elliptic curve for cryptographic operations, Ed25519, birational equivalent of the Montogomery curve Curve25519.

The ed25519 curve can be expressed algebraically as −x^2 + y^2 = 1 − (121665/121666) x^2 y^2

Thinking back to our general Twisted Edwards equation, this curve uses the constants `a = -1` and `d = 121665/121666`

This curve addresses many concerns raised by the cryptography community. It is well known that NIST4 standard algorithms have
issues. In recent times it has become clear that the random number generation algorithm PNRG is flawed and contains a potential backdoor. Seen from a broader perspective, curves endorsed by the NIST, are also indirectly endorsed by the NSA, something that the cryptography community sees with suspicion. It is well known that NSA has at times used its power over the NIST to weaken cryptographic algorithms.

Curve Ed25519 is not subject to any patents , and the team behind it has developed and adapted basic cryptographic algorithms with efficiency in mind. More importantly, it is currently thought to be secure.

# The address generation

## Keys and Seeds

### Seed and Mnemonic Seeds

A seed is an unique 256bit integer (usually represented as a 64 digit base16 number) for generating keys for unique keys.

_Example_

`112699108505435943726051051450940377552177626778909564691673845134467691053980`

In hex format

`f9296f587419f1cdede67de160fca14d1069ecaa4c52f012af031eea09ee039c`

It is actually just a representation of the Private Spend Key itself. This argument is valid only for the Mnemonic style.
This 256-bit scalar can be easily converted to a "24-digit" Base1626 "number" in the form of a mnemonic seed, which is 25 words long with the last word being used as a checksum.

Mnemonics convert on a ratio of 4:3 minimum: four bytes creates three words, plus one checksum word; eight bytes creates six words, plus one checksum word; and so on. The "seeds" created by this method will always be valid scalars as they are sent to sc_reduce32 first. The Private View Key is derived by hashing the Private Spend Key with Keccak-256, producing a second 256-bit integer, which is then sent to the function called "sc_reduce32" that check if the second 256-bit integer is compatible with the elliptic curve.

## Public and Private Keys

Public key cryptography is a field of cryptography which solves the key distribution problem involved with the symmetrical encryption. Let's explain what that means.

(serhack comment: probably I'll move this to cryptography concept)
Encryption is a mathematical algorithm that renders information unusable. This output known as a cipher text can be unscrambled or decrypted to produce the original input known as the plain-text.

encryption(Plain-text) = Cipher-text,
decryption(Cipher-text) = Plain-text
The inner workings and mechanics of these algorithms are public knowledge... Wait? So if the algorithms are known, can’t anyone decrypt the encrypted information?

Encryption algorithms uses a secret key or 'password' to secure the information. Unless someone has the key, they cannot decrypt the information. There are two types of encryption algorithms which manage keys differently: symmetrical and asymmetrical algorithms.

Symmetric algorithms secure their information during encryption with a key which is also used for the decryption of cipher-texts as described in notation below:

encryption(key1, Plain-text) = Cipher-text
decryption(key1, Cipher-text) = Plain-text
The problem with symmetrical encryption is that if person A wants to use the encryption algorithm to communicate with person B, they both have to have the secret key to decrypt the encrypted messages. Only once their key has been exchanged, will they be able to communicate in secret. The problem is that this 'key exchange' cannot be done in open public or through compromised communication channels where a eavesdropper might be listening in on. This is known as the key exchange problem.

Public key algorithms or asymmetrical encryption algorithms, solve the problem of sharing sensitive information. With public key cryptography, encryption and decryption functions of the key are separated into two keys as opposed to being a single key with dual functionality.

Since, there are two keys with their respective encryption and decryption capabilities separated, person A can simply share their encryption key or public key to person B over insecure communications without fear of compromising the condfidentiality of the message. Anyone with the public key can encrypt messages but this is relatively useless without the decryption key. Person B receives person A’s public key and now can use that to encrypt his own message to produce a cipher-text. Person B sends back the ciphertext back to person A where Person A then decrypts the ciphertext using their own decryption key or private key. Person A’s private key is at no point at risk of compromise as opposed to the symmetrical key exchange.

Public key encryption is used for sending secure messages over insecure communications. They are also used for digital signatures and is the underlying concept that validates transactions on a public ledger.

Bitcoin uses "asymmetric" style. The "asymmetric" simply means the are two keys:
* the private key (used primarily for signing data and for decrypting data as a transaction )
* the public key (used primarily for signature verification and encrypting data)

This works for Bitcoin, but not for Monero that has 4 keys:

* the public view key - a public key in order to check if it's a valid Monero Address;
* the private view key - a standard key used for viewing data such as the balance , fees and transactions amounts without touching anything related to creating and signing transactions;
* the public spend key - another public key in order to check if it's a valid Monero Transaction;
* the private spend key - a private key in order to sign the transaction, meaning you can spend your Moneroj with this key;

Finally, the Monero Public Addresses are direct representations of the pair of public keys, whereas Bitcoin (and clones) uses a hash of the single public key. EdDSA keys (both private and public) are 256 bits long, or 64 hexadecimal characters. Not every 256-bit integer is a valid EdDSA scalar (private key); it must be less than the "curve order" described with the equation in the Ed25519 function section.

### Monero Public Address

The raw address is useful for things like donations (where you don't care who donated) or exchange withdrawals (where you know the payer out of band). Its strength is simplicity.

Monero standard address is composed of two public keys:
* public spend key
* public view key

It also contains a checksum and a "network byte" which actually identifies both the network and the address type.

Index | Size in bytes | Description
--- | --- | --- 
0 | 1 | identifies the network and address type; 18 is for main net and it refers to "4"; 53 is for test chain corrisponded to "9".
1 | 32 | public spend key
33 | 32 | public view key
65 | 4 | checksum (hash created with Keccak function of the previous 65 bytes, trimmed to first 4 bytes)

It totals to 69 bytes. The bytes are then encoded (src) in Monero specific Base58 format, resulting in a 95 chars long string. Example standard address:

_4AdUndXHHZ6cfufTMvppY6JwXNouMBzSkbLYfpAV5Usx3skxNgYeYTRj5UzqtReoS44qo9mtmXCqY45DJ852K5Jv2684Rge_


The pseudo-code below defines the process of generating an address:

      Checksum = H(Varint(Prefix) || A || B)[0..3]
      SerializedString = Base58(Prefix || A || B || Checksum)

### Keys and Address Derivation

To add to the confusion, there are presently at least three different methods of private key derivation in existence for Monero, though Bitcoin also has many:

* __Original (non-deterministic) Style__ – The Private Spend Key and Private View Key are both independently and randomly chosen to form an account. There is no good way to back up a nondeterministic account other than keeping copies of the files. For these reasons, it is not recommended to use an account of this type.

* __Mnemonic (Electrum or Deterministic) Style__ – In this style, the Private View Key is derived from the Private Spend Key, so you only need to remember one thing: the seed, which is actually just a representation of the Private Spend Key itself. The Private View Key is derived by hashing the Private Spend Key with Keccak-256, producing a second 256-bit integer, which is then sent to a function that check if the private key is a valid EdDSA scalar. You can backup accounts of this type by writing down or otherwise saving the 25 word deterministic seed; you can easily restore using both Simplewallet and MyMonero.

* __MyMonero Style__ – This is similar to 2., but uses a 13 word seed instead of a 25 word seed. The 13 words convert to a 128-bit integer that is used for both spend and view key derivation, in the following form: the 128-bit integer is hashed with Keccak-256 to produce a 256-bit integer, a. a is sent to a function, which returns the Private Spend Key. a is hashed once more with Keccak-256 to produce a second 256-bit integer, b. b is then sent to the same function, which returns the Private View Key based on b. You may have noticed a critical difference between this style and the Electrum Style: MyMonero's Private View Key derivation is done by hashing random integer a, while Electrum Style derivation is done by hashing the Private Spend Key. This means that 13 and 25 word seeds are not compatible – it is not possible to create an Electrum Style seed (and account) that matches a MyMonero Style seed (and account) or vice versa; the view keypair will always be different.

The rest of the address generation process is the same in all three cases. The Private Spend Key and Private View Key are sent to the ed25519 scalarmult function to create their counterparts, the Public Spend Key and Public View Key.

# The Monero Blockchain 

Monero has a unique kind of blockchain. We talked about what a blockchain is and why it is important.
Basically, a blockchain is a distributed public ledger where each payments is recorded. The blockchain cannot be modified due to its distributed nature. It is based on various cryptography protocols and algorithms in order to avoid any cheating.

## Lightning Memory Mapped Database

Monero uses the LMDB database system to store its blockchain. Lightning Memory-Mapped Database (LMDB) is a software library that provides a high-performance embedded transactional database in the form of a key-value store.

LMDB is written in C with API bindings for several programming languages and is developed by Symas Corporation. LMDB stores arbitrary key/data pairs as byte arrays, has a range-based search capability, supports multiple data items for a single key and has a special mode for appending records at the end of the database which gives a dramatic write performance increase over other similar stores.

LMDB is not a relational database but like Berkeley DB and other similar databases such as dbm is strictly a key-value store.

## Block structure

The block structure was defined by the third document of CryptoNote Standards. It defines the way data is stored within blocks and the blockhain along with the corresponding data structures.

A block consists of three parts:
* block header;
* base transaction body
* list of transaction identifiers.

The list starts with the number of transaction identifiers that it contains.

## Block Header

Each block starts with a block header. The major version defines the block header parsing rules (i.e. block header format) and is incremented with each block header format update. The table below describes version 1 of the block header format. The minor version defines the interpretation details that are not related to block header parsing.

It is always safe to parse the block header of a particular major version with a parsing procedure suitable for said version, even if the minor version is unknown. Parsing the block header with an unknown major version is not safe as the content of the block header may be misinterpreted.


Field | Type | Content
--- | --- | --- 
major_version | varint | Major block header version (always 1)
minor_version | varint | Minor block header version
timestamp | varint | Block creation time (UNIX timestamp)
prev_id | hash | Identifier of the previous block
nonce | 4 bytes | Any value which is used in the network consensus algorithm

Varint means an integrer encoded in a variable-length prefix-free representation, such encoding does not contain null bytes. 

### Base Transaction

Each valid block contains a single base transaction. The base transaction's validity depends on the block height due to the following reasons:

Field | Type | Content
--- | --- | ---
version | varint | Transaction format version
unlock_time | varint | UNIX timestamp.
input_num | varint | Number of inputs. Always 1 for base transactions.
input_type | byte | Always 0xff for base transactions
height | varint | Height of the block which contains the transaction
output_num | varint | Number of outputs
outputs | array | Array of outputs

### List of Transaction Identifiers

Base transaction is followed by a list of transaction identifiers. A transaction identifier is a transaction body hashed with the Keccak hash function. The list starts with the number of identifiers and is followed by the identifiers themselves if it is not empty.

### Calculation of Block Identifier

The identifier of a block is the result of hashing the following data with Keccak:
* size of block_header, Merkle root hash, and the number of  transactions in bytes (varint)
* block_header,
* Merkle root hash,
* number of transactions (varint).

The goal of the Merkle root hash is to "attach" the transactions referred to in the list to the block header: once the Merkle root hash is fixed, the transactions cannot be modified. This is the reason for which you can't modify or cheat the blockchain.

#### Calculating Merke Root Hashing



## Fees



# Privacy Transactions

## Stealth Addresses

Chapter 3 described a situation where Leo sent George some Monero and in doing so he used George's public keys to produce a one-time public key, also known as a stealth address, that is unlinkable to the George's real keys. This section will go deeper to explain the cryptography behind that one-time public key.

### Sending

The highly technical formula descibed in the CryptoNote whitepaper to produce this public output is `P = Hs(rA|i)G + B`. This means that when Leo wants to send Monero to George he generates a 256 bit pseudorandom scalar to be used as the transaction private key, r. Leo is the only person that will ever know this key, not even George. Leo then multiplies George's public view key, A,  by his pseudorandom scalar and then concatantes the output index, i, to resulting point. 

This data is then run through the `Hash to Scalar` function. This function takes the input data, hashes it using the Keccak-256 algorithm, then takes that resulting hash modulo 2^255 + 27742317777372353535851937790883648493, a prime order of the ed25519 basepoint. The ed25519 basepoint, G, is then multiplied by the scalar that is output from that function. Finally, Leo adds this point with George's public spend key, B, to produce the final output, P.

### Recieving

Now, as described in chapter 3, George must scan the blockchain for outputs that belong to him. To do this he must calculate `P' = Hs(aR|i)G + B`. The process is very similiar to what Leo had to do to send the Monero. George will get the public transaction key, R, used in the transaction from the blockchain and multiply it by his private view key, a. He then must concatenate the output index to the resulting point and that data through the `Hash to Scalar` function. He then multiplies the ed25519 basepoint, G, by the resulting scalar and finally adds his own public spend key, B, to the resulting point to produce the final point P'. If the output George generated independantly, P', matches the output from the blockchain, P, then George knows that he owns that output and can spend the associated Monero.

