# Chapter 7

# Monero integration for developers

This chapter covers standards and protocols that developers can use to interact with Monero and build new tools. First, the OpenAlias and Monero URI formats are introduced, as effective ways to communicate addresses and other key details. The rest of the chapter discusses remote procedure calls with integration examples in C++ and python.

## 7.1 OpenAlias: convenient addresses in text (for humans)

It is extremely tricky for anybody without photographic memory to intuitively read and memorize cryptocurrency addresses. A real-life location like “123 Main St” or an email destination like “donate@masteringmonero.com” is much easier to interpret and recall than a Monero address, such as “45ttEikQEZWN1m7VxaVN9rjQkpSdmpGZ82GwUps66neQ1PqbQM no4wMY8F5jiDt2GoHzCtMwa7PDPJUJYb1GYrMP4CwAwNp”.

These cryptocurrency addresses contain a lot of information, but are unwieldy for humans. In fact, there is a famous trilemma known as Zooko's triangle that describes the inherent difficulty of designing name systems that simultaneously meet three criteria: secure, decentralized, and human-meaningful.

The Monero address posted above is not remotely ”human-meaningful,” however it successfully fulfills the other two criteria. Monero public addresses are at least 95 characters long, which is difficult to read and nigh impossible to memorize. Certainly there must be a way to simplify payment destinations!

The Monero Core Team released the OpenAlias standard to “square” Zooko's triangle by creating a human-readable way to communicate addresses. The OpenAlias standard is a text DNS record on a fully-qualified domain name (FQDN). Each text record need only contain two pieces of information: the prefix, and the recipient address. A recipient_name key-value pair can be added as well, however it is not necessary.

A typical OpenAlias text record looks like:

    oa1:xmr

    recipient_address=45ttEikQEZWN1m7VxaVN9rjQkpSdmpGZ82GwUps66neQ1PqbQMno4wMY8F5jiDt2GoHzCtMwa7PDPJUJYb1GYrMP4CwAwNp

    recipient_name=MoneroFFS

The “oa1:xmr” portion indicates that the record is based on OpenAlias version 1, and that the destination is a Monero address. A recipient name can be optionally specified, in this case “MoneroFFS”.

| Name | Size | Description
-- | -- | --
oa1: |	4	 | The record always starts with “oa1:”, which indicates it is an OpenAlias Version 1 record. If we don't have that prefix we ignore the record, as it may be an SPF record or something else that we don't care about.
symbol |	3 |	The code for cryptocurrency. The code should follow the ISO 4217 Rules: for example for Monero cryptocurrency the simbol is xmr and for Bitcoin the symbol is btc.
recipient_address = address; |	17 + address + 1 |	The recipient address. The format is recipient_address=your_address; where your_address is your cryptocoin address. For Monero, it will be a 95 characters string. Key-value pairs are separated by a semi-colon and, optionally, a space for legibility. This key-value must exist. OpenAlias exists to alias FQDNs to an “address” of any type, and this is expressed in this value.
recipient_name = description; |	14 + description + 1 |	This is not necessary, but useful for the purpose of confirming the correct recipient with the user, or for providing the user with the option of adding an entry to an address book.

The OpenAlias standard is extensible for developers, intuitive for users, and interoperable between both centralized and decentralized domain systems. The standard can be used with any cryptocurrency, and is already implemented by Monero, Bitcoin (Electrum) and HyperStake.

## 7.2 Monero_URI: convenient info in text (for computers)

The Monero uniform resource identifier standard describes a format for unambiguously communicating key data fields for invoices and transactions. These URIs are especially handy for merchandising purposes such as generating QR codes for payments.

Monero's URI syntax follows RFC 3986, and spaces must be x-www-urlencoded as %20. The example URI below URL shows a an example string that encodes a request for a 0.0413 XMR payment sent to address 4BKq...feW5 for the “Mastering Monero book.”

    monero:4BKjy1uVRTPiz4pHyaXXawb82XpzLiowSDd8rEQJGqvN6AD6kWosLQ6VJXW9sghopxXgQSh1RTd54JdvvCRsXiF41xvfeW5?tx_amount=0.0413&tx_description=Mastering%20Monero%20Book

Parameter | Type | Description
-- | -- | --
address |	String |	The raw address
tx_payment_id |	String |	The proposed payment ID of the transaction. (if mentioned)
recipient_name |	String |	The proposed contact name of the recipient. (if mentioned)
tx_amount |	Float |	The proposed amount of the transaction in atomic currency units.
tx_description |	String |	Describes the transaction which should be initiated.

## 7.3 Monero RPC

Developers integrating Monero can choose whether to utilize Monero's C++ API (C/C++) or the remote procedure call (RPC) interface. The RPC methods can be accessed by any programming language with the ability to make HTTP requests, so we'll take advantage of this flexibility and include example code for some common tasks.

The Monero daemon (monerod) is accessible via RPC for key activities such as checking balances or sending funds. The Monero wallet RPC (monero-wallet-RPC) allows you to manage all wallet functionality through JSON calls.

The RPC expresses Monero amounts in “atomic units”, which refers to the smallest fraction of a Monero coin that is recognized by the current monerod implementation. You can convert easily between formats using:

1 XMR = 1x10¹² atomic units

### 7.3.1 Initialization and configuration (setup & secure)

First, launch the Monero wallet RPC, specifying the port and location of your wallet file:

     $ ./monero-wallet-rpc --rpc-bind-port 18082 --disable-rpc-login --log-level 2 --wallet-file your-wallet-file --prompt-for-password
     
If you wish to use a remote node, simply add the --daemon-address flag followed by its address, for example:

     --daemon-address node.moneroworld.com:18089

Since monero-wallet-rpc doesn't bind your IP address and the port by default, you must specify --rpc-bind-ip yourip to connect remotely.

A few security precautions are recommended, since rolling into production with an open RPC interface is like going on a safari with no protection! Be sure to set a username and password before your node is exposed. If you follow these steps to put proper safeguards in place, your API will be safe.

The --restricted-rpc flag is extremely helpful for limiting RPC privileges to avoid potential abuse. For example, the restricted mode ensures that your node will not return privacy-sensitive data by RPC, and prevents external users from activating mining on your devices.

### 7.3.2 JSON RPC Format

JSON-RPC is a stateless, lightweight RPC protocol, using the JSON RFC 4672 data format. The specification primarily defines several data structures, and the rules for processing them. The protocol is transport-agnostic, meaning that its function is independent of the underlying transport mechanism. Thus, the same concepts can be applied within a given process, over sockets, through HTTP connections, or any other communication channel.

In order to receive any information from the wallet RPC, you must send a message with the POST method. The JSON-RPC API accepts messages with the format:
    
    { “jsonrpc” : version , “method” : method, “params”: params, “id”: id }

using inputs described by:

Field	| Description
version |	JSON RPC protocol version (Monero supports v2.0)
method |	declare which functionality is called
params |	specify additional information needed for the desired method
id |	number for tracking responses (integers starting from 0)

### 7.3.3 Example RPC calls

Monero's RPC can be accessed directly from a terminal, as shown in the following examples. The Monero website hosts thorough documentation describing the specifications and full functionality of the wallet RPC and daemon RPC.

#### 7.3.3.1 Get balance

A wallet's balance can be queried by the getbalance method:

        $ curl -X POST 127.0.0.1:18082/json_rpc -d '{“jsonrpc”:”2.0”,”id”:”0”,”method”:”getbalance”}' -H 'Content-Type: application/json'
        
which returns two outputs: the [total] balance and the unlocked_balance, which only includes transactions deep enough in the blockchain to be considered “safe” for spending (e.g. confirmed as available after 6 blocks).

        {“id”: “0”,“jsonrpc”: “2.0”, “result”: {  “balance”: 140000000000, “unlocked_balance”: 84000000000} }

In this case, the wallet contains 0.14 XMR, and only 0.084 XMR unlocked.

#### 7.3.3.2 Get address

Query the wallet's address.

       $ curl -X POST 127.0.0.1:18082/json_rpc -d '{“jsonrpc”:”2.0”,”id”:”0”,”method”:”getaddress”}' -H 'Content-Type: application/json'

which returns :

        {“id”: 0,“jsonrpc”: “2.0”,“result”: {“address”: “42uMGYwvLuUGJzqdWZvr47CGCBz1qNNExZeegcjLPMbaFkBb3XG g6Y1bUwaMbovzGWDXtaASxSBYtaiBB4wuDmrAMCygexH”, “addresses”: [{ “address”:  “42uMGYwvLuUGJzqdWZvr47CGCBz1qNNExZeegcjLPMbaFkBb3XG g6Y1bUwaMbovzGWDXtaASxSBYtaiBB4wuDmrAMCygexH”, “address_index”: 0, “label”: “Primary account”,“used”: false
           },
           {
               “address”: “894PaGJyxRjZU8nP7Dh4FuAyzr2dK3VT9ZZX95MxdAGP3HoHEpA bNb8Htgp5LKzc1pXQ8zhpokTZtcUTnzeU823oUPUGSpv”,
               “address_index”: 1,
               “label”: “”,
               “used”: false
           },
                       ]}}
                       
#### 7.3.3.3 Create address

Create a new address for an account. Optionally, label the new address.

        $ curl -X POST 127.0.0.1:18082/json_rpc -d '{“jsonrpc”:”2.0”,”id”:”0”,”method”:”create_address”, “params” : “{“account_index:0,”label”:”Secondary account”}}' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' {  “id”: 0, “jsonrpc”: “2.0”, “result”: {
    “address”: “86KoCQsZHQvSUnp9fFn92e5QGUiZtH1qZ1nNx1Jv5eJs94ywbLR2k 11CjZTq5o4v8j9bx3CEAturCheJqJR7cYdQKT4xE3w”, “address_index”: 9 }}
    
#### 7.3.3.4 Create account

Create an account

        $ curl -X POST 127.0.0.1:18082/json_rpc -d '{“jsonrpc”:”2.0”,”id”:”0”,”method”:”create_account”,  “params”:{“label”:”Secondary account”}}' -H 'Content-Type: application/json'

        { “id”: “0”, “jsonrpc”: “2.0”, “result”: {
    “account_index”: 1, “address”: “88bV1uo76AaKZaWD389kCf5EfPxKFYEKUQbs9ZRJm23E2X2oYgV9b Q54FiY6hAB83aDXMUSZF6KWyfeQqzLqaAeeFrk9iic” } }
    
#### 7.3.3.5 Transfer

Transfer (send) an amount of Monero, specified in atomic units.

        $ curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:18082/json_rpc -d ' {“jsonrpc”:”2.0”, ”id”:”0”, ”method”:”transfer”, ”params”:{“destinations”: [{“amount”:100000000, ”address”:”9wNgSYy2F9qPZu7KBjvsFgZLTKE2TZgEpNFbGka9gA5 zPmAXS35QzzYaLKJRkYTnzgArGNX7TvSqZC87tBLwtaC5RQgJ8rm” }, {“amount”:200000000,  ”address”:”9vH5D7Fv47mbpCpdcthcjU34rqiiAYRCh1tYywmhqnE k9iwCE9yppgNCXAyVHG5qJt2kExa42TuhzQfJbmbpeGLkVbg8xit” }],”mixin”:4,”get_tx_key”: true}}' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' { “id”: “0”, “jsonrpc”: “2.0”, “result”: { “fee”: 48958481211, “tx_hash”: “985180f468637bc6d2f72ee054e1e34b8d5097988bb29a2e0cb 763e4464db23c”,
    “tx_key”: “8d62e5637f1fcc9a8904057d6bed6c697618507b193e956f77c 31ce662b2ee07”,
    “amount”: 300000000,
    “tx_blob”: “”,
    “tx_metadata”: “”,
    “multisig_txset”: “” } }

## 7.4 Monero integration in practice (Python and C++ tutorials)

Picking the coding language for these examples is tricky, since every developer knows that there's no perfect universal programming language. However, Python is well-suited for Mastering Monero, since it is a free and open-source scripting language that is relatively approachable and comprehensible for novices.

The following examples use the newest version, Python 3. Most Debian-based Linux distributions ship with Python 2 and Python 3 pre-installed. Before starting, you should update and upgrade your software to ensure that necessary resources are up-to-date:

        $ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get -y upgrade

The code for the following tutorials is freely available on a public repository. You can directly download the exercises through the powerful 'git' control version system using the command:

Each tutorial is located on a folder. For example, “Tutorial 1”  will be tutorial-1. To download the resources via Git versioning system, simply execute:

    $ git clone https://github.com/monerobook/code

### 7.4.1 Tutorial 1 - Get your balance

This program will connect to the daemon via RPC, then query and print the account balance. From the section introducing RPC, you might remember the getbalance function (also responds to get_balance).

We'll start by importing two Python libraries that are very useful for making POST requests in python: 'requests' and 'json'.

        # Mastering Monero Tutorial. This is a comment
        import requests
        import json

        ## Import Setup variables
        ## Url for JSON RPC interface. We assume that your RPC interface is running on localhost port 18082
        url = “http://localhost:18082/json_rpc”

        ## JSON headers . Required
        headers = {'content-type': 'application/json'}

        ## RPC input . Adding method name , at the moment we don't need variables.

        rpc_fields = {
	        “method” : “get_balance”
        }
        
Recall the standard JSON fields that should be included in an RPC call:

        # Adding the JSON RPC version and id. Id is a int variable which should be incremented each request. First request is 0 , second is one and ...
    rpc_fields.update({“jsonrpc”: “2.0”, “id”: “0”})
    
Now everything is prepared, so there's only one thing left to do! Send all the variables to the JSON RPC interface using the POST HTTP method:
        
        # execute the rpc request
        response = requests.post(url,data=json.dumps(rpc_input),headers=headers)
        # print the response as JSON
        print(json.dumps(response.json()))
        
Save all the above code as tutorial.py (or any name of your choice) and execute:
        
        $ python tutorial.py
     
Your script should print the output of the getbalances call into your terminal:

        {
    “id”: “0”,
    “jsonrpc”: “2.0”,
    “result”: {
        “balance”: 0,
        “multisig_import_needed”: false,
        “unlocked_balance”: 0 }}
        
While this contains all of the information we need, the output RPC syntax is not formatted for optimal human readability. Staring at too many {}'s can become disorienting after a while!

For a cleaner output, we can add a few lines of code to the bottom of the tutorial script, so that it only prints the balance (or unlocked balance, if you'd prefer).

        # Get the balance from response array and convert to a string.
        balance = str(response.json().get('result').get('balance'))

        print(“Balance is “ + balance )

Now, running

        $ python tutorial.py
        
Should simply return:

        Balance is 426700000

You can use RPC methods like this to develop your own personal client for your Monero wallet!

## 7.4.2 Tutorial 2 - How to generate a pseudo-random address

In chapter 5, we introduced the concept of pseudo-random address generation. To augment the mathematical explanation, here is a python implementation for you to follow.

First, import necessary libraries and add them to the path.

	# Import libraries. Hexlify for hex code, utils for the utility, etc.
	import os, sys
	from binascii import hexlify, unhexlify
	sys.path.append('../libraries')
	import utils
	import ed25519
	import base58

To code the function generate_random_address, several steps must be included:

1) Create your seed by pseudo-randomly generating a 32 byte (256-bit) random number. Use the hexlify library to convert your seed to a hex-encoded string, stored in the variable seed.

2) Record your secret spend key by reducing the seed to a valid scalar for the ed25519 elliptic curve. Your secret spend key is simply this representation of your seed. Verification requires the sc_reduce32 function from the utils library.

3) Calculate your secret view key as the reduced hash of your secret spend key. The hash_to_scalar function hashes the input, then converts it to a valid scalar for the ed25519 elliptic curve.

4) Derive public keys by using the publickey_to_private_key function to multiply your private keys by the generator point. Your secret spend key yields your public spend key, and likewise your secret view key is used to derive your public view key.

5) Begin building your public address by concatenating the network byte (0x12 for public Monero addresses), the public spend key, and the public view key. These are the key pieces of information included in every Monero address.

6) Calculate the checksum that will be appended to the above string by taking the first 4 bytes (8 hex characters) of its Keccak-256 hash.

7) Encode the info + checksum in Base 58 representation for human-readability. That's all there is to it! As discussed in Chapter 5, Monero addresses consist of:

[network byte + public spend key + public view key + checksum]

	def generate_random_address():
    		## Generate 32 bytes (256 bits) of pseudo-random data
    		seed = hexlify(os.urandom(32))

    		## Reduce random data to make it a valid ed25519 scalar
    		secret_spend_key = utils.sc_reduce32(seed)

    		## Use a reduced hash of the secret spend key for the deterministic secret view key
    		secret_view_key = utils.hash_to_scalar(secret_spend_key)

    		## multiply by the generator point to get public keys from private keys
    		public_spend_key = utils.publickey_to_privatekey(secret_spend_key)
    		public_view_key  = utils.publickey_to_privatekey(secret_ view_key)
    		## the network byte, public spend key, and public view key are all concatenated together
    		## 0x12 is the Monero mainnet network byte
    		network_byte = “12”
    		## Concatenate the three strings
    		data = network_byte + public_spend_key + public_view_key
    		hash = utils.keccak_256(data)
    		## checksum is the first 4 bytes (8 hex characters) of the hash of the previous data
    		checksum = hash[0:8]
    		address = base58.encode(data + checksum)
    
    		## Printing the keys
    
    		print(“Secret_spend_key : “ + secret_spend_key)
    		print(“Secret_view_key : “ + secret_view_key)
    		print(“Public_spend_key : “ + public_spend_key)
    		print(“Public_view_key : “ + public_view_key)
    		## Returning address generated
    	return address

### 7.4.3 Tutorial 3 - Vanity address generator

Vanity addresses refer to cryptocurrency addresses generated to have some particular prefix that you choose. If you want an address with a “cat” name, you can use this method to generate a public address beginning with “4cat”. There are some limitations due to the Monero address format: You cannot remove the initial 4 (the hex-encoded network byte, 0x12) and the base 58 encoding excludes some characters (I,l,0,O).

You should never trust website or third party that generates vanity cryptocurrency addresses for you. There is no way to know whether those keys were generated securely and not retained by the service or a snoop. 

Here is a small Python script that you can code and verify yourself, to safely generate your own vanity addresses. The approach is simple: repeatedly generate addresses until one of the results matches your criteria. Short vanity strings are recommended, since the time necessary to brute force a qualifying address increases dramatically as the length of the target string increases.

Most of the code is contained in while(1), an infinite loop that will run until a matching address is discovered. With each iteration through the loop, it calls the generate_random_address function from the previous example for a fresh address.

As soon as the address is created, the script checks whether the first characters match the user's desired input. When a suitable address is discovered, then the script prints the address and exits, breaking the while loop.

	import sys
	sys.path.append('../libraries')
	import address

	if (len(sys.argv) != 2):
    		print(“usage: python vanity_address.py [desired_prefix]”)
    		exit()

	if (sys.argv[1][0] != “4”):
    		print “Monero addresses must start with the character 4”
    		exit()

	## create random addresses until one of them matches the desired prefix
	## bruteforcing takes a while
	while(1):
    		rand_address = address.generate_random_address()
    		if (rand_address[0:len(sys.argv[1])] == sys.argv[1]):
        		print(rand_address)
        	exit()
    	else:
        	print(“searching”)
		
## 7.4.4 Tutorial 4 - How to create a stealth address

The stealth address generation method explained in chapter 5 is somewhat complex, so a Python implementation is included here for assistance. Coding through a new process step-by-step can be very helpful for interpreting and internalizing the mathematics.

The goal of this tutorial is to generate a stealth address, using: a public view key, a public spend key, and a random private TX key (256-bit scalar).

First, the necessary dependencies are imported from the folder libraries
