# Chapter 8

# Integrating Monero

So far, this book has focused on getting started with Monero for the end user. In this chapter, we instead include information about how you can implement Monero in your services and systems!
Merchants that accept Monero can expect fast, private, irreversible transactions. There are several systems for integrating Monero into your business.

For example, the Monero Integrations plugin (else created by SerHack) allows any online shop to to include a Monero payment option. Setting it up is as easy as installing one of the plugins for many popular Content Management Systems. In the spirit of the currency that it is named after, the Monero Integrations project is entirely decentralized. There is no third party to trust or register with, and Monero payments from customers are routed directly to your wallet. 

Kasisto was the first a Monero Point of Sale payment system, and was designed for accepting Monero in-store, on a phone or tablet. An other option could be Globee developed by Riccardo Spagni which is a convenient yet property, centralized service.

Any implementation with features such as checking wallet balances, asking for integrated addresses or a subaddress will require a direct connection with a wallet. The Monero Wallet Remote Protocol Communication (RPC, called monero-wallet-rpc) allows you to manage the wallet with JSON calls.

## Using Monero Wallet Remote Protocol Communication
 
### Setting up the Monero Wallet RPC
 
First, you can initialize the Monero Wallet RPC:
    ./monero-wallet-rpc --rpc-bind-port 18082 --disable-rpc-login --log-level 2 --wallet-file
your-wallet-file --prompt-for-password
If you wish to use a remote node you can add the --daemon-address flag followed by the address of the node, for example:
--daemon-address node.moneroworld.com:18089
Remember that monero-wallet-rpc doesn’t bind your IP address and the port by default, so you must specify --rpc-bind-ip yourip to connect remotely.

## JSON RPC Protocol

JSON-RPC is a stateless, lightweight RPC protocol, using the JSON RFC 4672 data format. The specification primarily defines several data structures, and the rules for processing them. The protocol is “transport-agnostic,” meaning that its function is independent of the underlying transport mechanism. Thus, the same concepts can be applied within a given process, over sockets, through HTTP connections, or within various messaging environment.

In order to receive any information from the wallet RPC, you must send a message with the POST method. The JSON-RPC API accepts messages with the format:
{ “jsonrpc” : version , “method” : method, “params”: params, “id”: id },

using fields described by:

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| version | Version of the JSON RPC protocol. Monero Wallet RPC supports the 2.0 version.
| method | method you would like to call.
| params | array; parameters for the method. They can include any additional information.
| id | number (int); start from 0, used for tracking the responses.

## Monero RPC Calls

Monero RPC API is compatible with methods provided by the Monero developers. Methods include transfering to an address a given amount, requesting subaddresses or integrated addresses. In this section, you will read about the “famous” methods for calling an RPC action.

For example: 
- Transfer
- make_uri
- parse_uri
- make_integrated address
...

